A dented spider like a snow drop white
On a white Heal-all, holding up a moth Like a white piece of lifeless satin cloth - Saw ever curious eye so strange a sight? - Portent in little, assorted death and blight Like the ingredients of a witches' broth? - The beady spider, the flower like a froth, And the moth carried like a paper kite.
What had that flower to do with being white, The blue prunella every child's delight.
What brought the kindred spider to that height? (Make we no thesis of the miller's plight.)
What but design of darkness and of night? Design, design! Do I use the word aright?
Anonymous submission.
A Boundless Moment
He halted in the wind, and - what was that
Far in the maples, pale, but not a ghost?
He stood there bringing March against his thought, And yet too ready to believe the most.
'Oh, that's the Paradise-in-bloom,' I said; And truly it was fair enough for flowers had we but in us to assume in march Such white luxuriance of May for ours.
We stood a moment so in a strange world, Myself as one his own pretense deceives;
And then I said the truth (and we moved on) . A young beech clinging to its last year's leaves.


A Brook In The City
The farmhouse lingers, though averse to square With the new city street it has to wear
A number in. But what about the brook
That held the house as in an elbow-crook?
I ask as one who knew the brook, its strength And impulse, having dipped a finger length And made it leap my knuckle, having tossed
A flower to try its currents where they crossed. The meadow grass could be cemented down From growing under pavements of a town; The apple trees be sent to hearth-stone flame. Is water wood to serve a brook the same? How else dispose of an immortal force
No longer needed? Staunch it at its source
With cinder loads dumped down? The brook was thrown Deep in a sewer dungeon under stone
In fetid darkness still to live and run --
And all for nothing it had ever done
Except forget to go in fear perhaps.
No one would know except for ancient maps
That such a brook ran water. But I wonder
If from its being kept forever under,
The thoughts may not have risen that so keep
This new-built city from both work and sleep.


A Cliff Dwelling
There sandy seems the golden sky And golden seems the sandy plain. No habitation meets the eye Unless in the horizon rim,
Some halfway up the limestone wall, That spot of black is not a stain
Or shadow, but a cavern hole,
Where someone used to climb and crawl To rest from his besetting fears.
I see the callus on his soul
The disappearing last of him
And of his race starvation slim,
Oh years ago - ten thousand years.


A Considerable Speck
(Microscopic)
A speck that would have been beneath my sight On any but a paper sheet so white
Set off across what I had written there.
And I had idly poised my pen in air
To stop it with a period of ink
When something strange about it made me think, This was no dust speck by my breathing blown, But unmistakably a living mite
With inclinations it could call its own.
It paused as with suspicion of my pen,
And then came racing wildly on again
To where my manuscript was not yet dry;
Then paused again and either drank or smelt-- With loathing, for again it turned to fly.
Plainly with an intelligence I dealt.
It seemed too tiny to have room for feet,
Yet must have had a set of them complete
To express how much it didn't want to die.
It ran with terror and with cunning crept.
It faltered: I could see it hesitate;
Then in the middle of the open sheet
Cower down in desperation to accept
Whatever I accorded it of fate.
I have none of the tenderer-than-thou Collectivistic regimenting love
With which the modern world is being swept.
But this poor microscopic item now!
Since it was nothing I knew evil of
I let it lie there till I hope it slept.
I have a mind myself and recognize Mind when I meet with it in any guise No one can know how glad I am to find On any sheet the least display of mind.

A Dream Pang
I had withdrawn in forest, and my song
Was swallowed up in leaves that blew alway;
And to the forest edge you came one day
(This was my dream) and looked and pondered long, But did not enter, though the wish was strong:
You shook your pensive head as who should say,
‘I dare not—too far in his footsteps stray—
He must seek me would he undo the wrong.
Not far, but near, I stood and saw it all
Behind low boughs the trees let down outside; And the sweet pang it cost me not to call
And tell you that I saw does still abide.
But ’tis not true that thus I dwelt aloof,
For the wood wakes, and you are here for proof.


A Fountain, a Bottle, a Donkey's Ears, and Some Books
Old Davis owned a solid mica mountain
In Dalton that would someday make his fortune. There'd been some Boston people out to see it: And experts said that deep down in the mountain The mica sheets were big as plate-glass windows. He'd like to take me there and show it to me.
'I'll tell you what you show me. You remember
You said you knew the place where once, on Kinsman, The early Mormons made a settlement
And built a stone baptismal font outdoors-
But Smith, or someone, called them off the mountain To go West to a worse fight with the desert.
You said you'd seen the stone baptismal font.
Well, take me there.'
Someday I will.' 'Today.'
'Huh, that old bathtub, what is that to see? Let's talk about it.'
'Let's go see the place.'
'To shut you up I'll tell you what I'll do:
I'll find that fountain if it takes all summer, And both of our united strengths, to do it.'
'You've lost it, then?'
'Not so but I can find it.
No doubt it's grown up some to woods around it. The mountain may have shifted since I saw it
In eighty-five.'
'As long ago as that?'


'If I remember rightly, it had sprung
A leak and emptied then. And forty years Can do a good deal to bad masonry.
You won't see any Mormon swimming in it. But you have said it, and we're off to find it. Old as I am, I'm going to let myself
Be dragged by you all over everywhere- '
'I thought you were a guide.'
'I am a guide,
And that's why I can't decently refuse you.'
We made a day of it out of the world, Ascending to descend to reascend.
The old man seriously took his bearings, And spoke his doubts in every open place.
We came out on a look-off where we faced A cliff, and on the cliff a bottle painted,
Or stained by vegetation from above,
A likeness to surprise the thrilly tourist.
'Well, if I haven't brought you to the fountain, At least I've brought you to the famous Bottle.'
'I won't accept the substitute. It's empty.'
'So's everything.'
'I want my fountain.'
'I guess you'd find the fountain just as empty. And anyway this tells me where I am.'
'Hadn't you long suspected where you were?'
'You mean miles from that Mormon settlement? Look here, you treat your guide with due respect If you don't want to spend the night outdoors.
I vow we must be near the place from where The two converging slides, the avalanches,


On Marshall, look like donkey's ears.
We may as well see that and save the day.'
'Don't donkey's ears suggest we shake our own?'
'For God's sake, aren't you fond of viewing nature? You don't like nature. All you like is books.
What signify a donkey's cars and bottle,
However natural? Give you your books!
Well then, right here is where I show you books. Come straight down off this mountain just as fast As we can fall and keep a-bouncing on our feet. It's hell for knees unless done hell-for-leather.'
Be ready, I thought, for almost anything.
We struck a road I didn't recognize,
But welcomed for the chance to lave my shoes In dust once more. We followed this a mile, Perhaps, to where it ended at a house
I didn't know was there. It was the kind
To bring me to for broad-board paneling.
I never saw so good a house deserted.
'Excuse me if I ask you in a window
That happens to be broken, Davis said.
'The outside doors as yet have held against us. I want to introduce you to the people
Who used to live here. They were Robinsons. You must have heard of Clara Robinson,
The poetess who wrote the book of verses
And had it published. It was all about
The posies on her inner windowsill,
And the birds on her outer windowsill,
And how she tended both, or had them tended: She never tended anything herself.
She was 'shut in' for life. She lived her whole Life long in bed, and wrote her things in bed. I'll show You how she had her sills extended
To entertain the birds and hold the flowers.
Our business first's up attic with her books.'


We trod uncomfortably on crunching glass Through a house stripped of everything
Except, it seemed, the poetess's poems.
Books, I should say!- if books are what is needed. A whole edition in a packing case
That, overflowing like a horn of plenty,
Or like the poetess's heart of love,
Had spilled them near the window, toward the light Where driven rain had wet and swollen them. Enough to stock a village library-
Unfortunately all of one kind, though.
They bad been brought home from some publisher And taken thus into the family.
Boys and bad hunters had known what to do
With stone and lead to unprotected glass:
Shatter it inward on the unswept floors.
How had the tender verse escaped their outrage? By being invisible for what it was,
Or else by some remoteness that defied them
To find out what to do to hurt a poem.
Yet oh! the tempting flatness of a book,
To send it sailing out the attic window
Till it caught wind and, opening out its covers, Tried to improve on sailing like a tile
By flying like a bird (silent in flight,
But all the burden of its body song),
Only to tumble like a stricken bird,
And lie in stones and bushes unretrieved.
Books were not thrown irreverently about.
They simply lay where someone now and then, Having tried one, had dropped it at his feet
And left it lying where it fell rejected.
Here were all those the poetess's life
Had been too short to sell or give away.
'Take one,' Old Davis bade me graciously. 'Why not take two or three?'
'Take all you want.'
Good-looking books like that.' He picked one fresh In virgin wrapper from deep in the box,
www.PoemHunter.com - The World's Poetry Archive 13

And stroked it with a horny-handed kindness. He read in one and I read in another,
Both either looking for or finding something.
The attic wasps went missing by like bullets. I was soon satisfied for the time being.
All the way home I kept remembering
The small book in my pocket. It was there. The poetess had sighed, I knew, in heaven
At having eased her heart of one more copy- Legitimately. My demand upon her,
Though slight, was a demand. She felt the tug. In time she would be rid of all her books.


A Girl's Garden
A neighbor of mine in the village
Likes to tell how one spring
When she was a girl on the farm, she did A childlike thing.
One day she asked her father
To give her a garden plot
To plant and tend and reap herself, And he said, 'Why not?'
In casting about for a corner
He thought of an idle bit
Of walled-off ground where a shop had stood, And he said, 'Just it.'
And he said, 'That ought to make you
An ideal one-girl farm,
And give you a chance to put some strength On your slim-jim arm.'
It was not enough of a garden Her father said, to plow;
So she had to work it all by hand, But she don't mind now.
She wheeled the dung in a wheelbarrow Along a stretch of road;
But she always ran away and left
Her not-nice load,
And hid from anyone passing.
And then she begged the seed.
She says she thinks she planted one Of all things but weed.
A hill each of potatoes,
Radishes, lettuce, peas,
Tomatoes, beets, beans, pumpkins, corn, And even fruit trees.


And yes, she has long mistrusted That a cider-apple
In bearing there today is hers, Or at least may be.
Her crop was a miscellany When all was said and done, A little bit of everything,
A great deal of none.
Now when she sees in the village How village things go,
Just when it seems to come in right, She says, 'I know!
'It's as when I was a farmer...'
Oh never by way of advice!
And she never sins by telling the tale To the same person twice.


A Hillside Thaw
To think to know the country and now know The hillside on the day the sun lets go
Ten million silver lizards out of snow!
As often as I've seen it done before
I can't pretend to tell the way it's done.
It looks as if some magic of the sun
Lifted the rug that bred them on the floor
And the light breaking on them made them run. But if I though to stop the wet stampede,
And caught one silver lizard by the tail,
And put my foot on one without avail,
And threw myself wet-elbowed and wet-kneed In front of twenty others' wriggling speed,-
In the confusion of them all aglitter,
And birds that joined in the excited fun
By doubling and redoubling song and twitter, I have no doubt I'd end by holding none.
It takes the moon for this. The sun's a wizard By all I tell; but so's the moon a witch.
From the high west she makes a gentle cast And suddenly, without a jerk or twitch,
She has her speel on every single lizard.
I fancied when I looked at six o'clock
The swarm still ran and scuttled just as fast. The moon was waiting for her chill effect.
I looked at nine: the swarm was turned to rock
In every lifelike posture of the swarm,
Transfixed on mountain slopes almost erect.
Across each other and side by side they lay.
The spell that so could hold them as they were
Was wrought through trees without a breath of storm To make a leaf, if there had been one, stir.
One lizard at the end of every ray.
The thought of my attempting such a stray!


A Late Walk
When I go up through the mowing field, The headless aftermath,
Smooth-laid like thatch with the heavy dew, Half closes the garden path.
And when I come to the garden ground, The whir of sober birds
Up from the tangle of withered weeds Is sadder than any words
A tree beside the wall stands bare,
But a leaf that lingered brown, Disturbed, I doubt not, by my thought, Comes softly rattling down.
I end not far from my going forth By picking the faded blue
Of the last remaining aster flower To carry again to you.


A Line-Storm Song
The line-storm clouds fly tattered and swift, The road is forlorn all day,
Where a myriad snowy quartz stones lift, And the hoof-prints vanish away.
The roadside flowers, too wet for the bee, Expend their bloom in vain.
Come over the hills and far with me,
And be my love in the rain.
The birds have less to say for themselves
In the wood-world’s torn despair
Than now these numberless years the elves, Although they are no less there:
All song of the woods is crushed like some Wild, easily shattered rose.
Come, be my love in the wet woods; come, Where the boughs rain when it blows.
There is the gale to urge behind
And bruit our singing down,
And the shallow waters aflutter with wind From which to gather your gown.
What matter if we go clear to the west, And come not through dry-shod?
For wilding brooch shall wet your breast The rain-fresh goldenrod.
Oh, never this whelming east wind swells But it seems like the sea’s return
To the ancient lands where it left the shells Before the age of the fern;
And it seems like the time when after doubt Our love came back amain.
Oh, come forth into the storm and rout
And be my love in the rain.

A Minor Bird
I have wished a bird would fly away, And not sing by my house all day;
Have clapped my hands at him from the door When it seemed as if I could bear no more.
The fault must partly have been in me. The bird was not to blame for his key.
And of course there must be something wrong In wanting to silence any song.


A Passing Glimpse
To Ridgely Torrence
On Last Looking into His 'Hesperides'
I often see flowers from a passing car
That are gone before I can tell what they are.
I want to get out of the train and go back To see what they were beside the track.
I name all the flowers I am sure they weren't; Not fireweed loving where woods have burnt-
Not bluebells gracing a tunnel mouth- Not lupine living on sand and drouth.
Was something brushed across my mind That no one on earth will ever find?
Heaven gives it glimpses only to those Not in position to look too close.


A Patch Of Old Snow
There's a patch of old snow in a corner That I should have guessed
Was a blow-away paper the rain
Had brought to rest.
It is speckled with grime as if Small print overspread it,
The news of a day I've forgotten -- If I ever read it.


A Peck of Gold
Dust always blowing about the town, Except when sea-fog laid it down, And I was one of the children told Some of the blowing dust was gold.
All the dust the wind blew high Appeared like god in the sunset sky, But I was one of the children told Some of the dust was really gold.
Such was life in the Golden Gate: Gold dusted all we drank and ate, And I was one of the children told, 'We all must eat our peck of gold.'


A Prayer In Spring
Oh, give us pleasure in the flowers to-day; And give us not to think so far away
As the uncertain harvest; keep us here
All simply in the springing of the year.
Oh, give us pleasure in the orchard white, Like nothing else by day, like ghosts by night; And make us happy in the happy bees,
The swarm dilating round the perfect trees.
And make us happy in the darting bird That suddenly above the bees is heard, The meteor that thrusts in with needle bill, And off a blossom in mid air stands still.
For this is love and nothing else is love, The which it is reserved for God above To sanctify to what far ends He will, But which it only needs that we fulfil.


A Question
A voice said, Look me in the stars And tell me truly, men of earth,
If all the soul-and-body scars
Were not too much to pay for birth.
Robert Frost


A Servant To Servants
I didn't make you know how glad I was
To have you come and camp here on our land.
I promised myself to get down some day
And see the way you lived, but I don't know!
With a houseful of hungry men to feed
I guess you'd find.... It seems to me
I can't express my feelings any more
Than I can raise my voice or want to lift
My hand (oh, I can lift it when I have to).
Did ever you feel so? I hope you never.
It's got so I don't even know for sure
Whether I am glad, sorry, or anything.
There's nothing but a voice-like left inside
That seems to tell me how I ought to feel,
And would feel if I wasn't all gone wrong.
You take the lake. I look and look at it.
I see it's a fair, pretty sheet of water.
I stand and make myself repeat out loud
The advantages it has, so long and narrow,
Like a deep piece of some old running river
Cut short off at both ends. It lies five miles
Straight away through the mountain notch
From the sink window where I wash the plates,
And all our storms come up toward the house, Drawing the slow waves whiter and whiter and whiter. It took my mind off doughnuts and soda biscuit
To step outdoors and take the water dazzle
A sunny morning, or take the rising wind
About my face and body and through my wrapper, When a storm threatened from the Dragon's Den, And a cold chill shivered across the lake.
I see it's a fair, pretty sheet of water,
Our Willoughby! How did you hear of it?
I expect, though, everyone's heard of it.
In a book about ferns? Listen to that!
You let things more like feathers regulate
Your going and coming. And you like it here?
I can see how you might. But I don't know!
It would be different if more people came,


For then there would be business. As it is,
The cottages Len built, sometimes we rent them, Sometimes we don't. We've a good piece of shore That ought to be worth something, and may yet.
But I don't count on it as much as Len.
He looks on the bright side of everything,
Including me. He thinks I'll be all right
With doctoring. But it's not medicine--
Lowe is the only doctor's dared to say so--
It's rest I want--there, I have said it out--
From cooking meals for hungry hired men
And washing dishes after them--from doing
Things over and over that just won't stay done.
By good rights I ought not to have so much
Put on me, but there seems no other way.
Len says one steady pull more ought to do it.
He says the best way out is always through.
And I agree to that, or in so far
As that I can see no way out but through-- Leastways for me--and then they'll be convinced.
It's not that Len don't want the best for me.
It was his plan our moving over in
Beside the lake from where that day I showed you We used to live--ten miles from anywhere.
We didn't change without some sacrifice,
But Len went at it to make up the loss.
His work's a man's, of course, from sun to sun,
But he works when he works as hard as I do-- Though there's small profit in comparisons.
(Women and men will make them all the same.)
But work ain't all. Len undertakes too much.
He's into everything in town. This year
It's highways, and he's got too many men
Around him to look after that make waste.
They take advantage of him shamefully,
And proud, too, of themselves for doing so.
We have four here to board, great good-for-nothings, Sprawling about the kitchen with their talk
While I fry their bacon. Much they care!
No more put out in what they do or say
Than if I wasn't in the room at all.
Coming and going all the time, they are:


I don't learn what their names are, let alone Their characters, or whether they are safe
To have inside the house with doors unlocked. I'm not afraid of them, though, if they're not Afraid of me. There's two can play at that.
I have my fancies: it runs in the family.
My father's brother wasn't right. They kept him Locked up for years back there at the old farm.
I've been away once--yes, I've been away.
The State Asylum. I was prejudiced;
I wouldn't have sent anyone of mine there;
You know the old idea--the only asylum
Was the poorhouse, and those who could afford, Rather than send their folks to such a place,
Kept them at home; and it does seem more human. But it's not so: the place is the asylum.
There they have every means proper to do with, And you aren't darkening other people's lives-- Worse than no good to them, and they no good
To you in your condition; you can't know
Affection or the want of it in that state.
I've heard too much of the old-fashioned way.
My father's brother, he went mad quite young. Some thought he had been bitten by a dog, Because his violence took on the form
Of carrying his pillow in his teeth;
But it's more likely he was crossed in love,
Or so the story goes. It was some girl.
Anyway all he talked about was love.
They soon saw he would do someone a mischief
If he wa'n't kept strict watch of, and it ended
In father's building him a sort of cage,
Or room within a room, of hickory poles,
Like stanchions in the barn, from floor to ceiling,-- A narrow passage all the way around.
Anything they put in for furniture
He'd tear to pieces, even a bed to lie on.
So they made the place comfortable with straw, Like a beast's stall, to ease their consciences.
Of course they had to feed him without dishes. They tried to keep him clothed, but he paraded With his clothes on his arm--all of his clothes.


Cruel--it sounds. I 'spose they did the best
They knew. And just when he was at the height, Father and mother married, and mother came,
A bride, to help take care of such a creature,
And accommodate her young life to his.
That was what marrying father meant to her.
She had to lie and hear love things made dreadful
By his shouts in the night. He'd shout and shout
Until the strength was shouted out of him,
And his voice died down slowly from exhaustion.
He'd pull his bars apart like bow and bow-string,
And let them go and make them twang until
His hands had worn them smooth as any ox-bow. And then he'd crow as if he thought that child's play-- The only fun he had. I've heard them say, though, They found a way to put a stop to it.
He was before my time--I never saw him;
But the pen stayed exactly as it was
There in the upper chamber in the ell,
A sort of catch-all full of attic clutter.
I often think of the smooth hickory bars.
It got so I would say--you know, half fooling--
"It's time I took my turn upstairs in jail"--
Just as you will till it becomes a habit.
No wonder I was glad to get away.
Mind you, I waited till Len said the word.
I didn't want the blame if things went wrong.
I was glad though, no end, when we moved out,
And I looked to be happy, and I was,
As I said, for a while--but I don't know!
Somehow the change wore out like a prescription. And there's more to it than just window-views
And living by a lake. I'm past such help--
Unless Len took the notion, which he won't,
And I won't ask him--it's not sure enough.
I 'spose I've got to go the road I'm going:
Other folks have to, and why shouldn't I?
I almost think if I could do like you,
Drop everything and live out on the ground--
But it might be, come night, I shouldn't like it,
Or a long rain. I should soon get enough,
And be glad of a good roof overhead.

I've lain awake thinking of you, I'll warrant,
More than you have yourself, some of these nights. The wonder was the tents weren't snatched away From over you as you lay in your beds.
I haven't courage for a risk like that.
Bless you, of course, you're keeping me from work, But the thing of it is, I need to be kept.
There's work enough to do--there's always that; But behind's behind. The worst that you can do
Is set me back a little more behind.
I sha'n't catch up in this world, anyway.
I'd rather you'd not go unless you must.


A Soldier
He is that fallen lance that lies as hurled,
That lies unlifted now, come dew, come rust,
But still lies pointed as it plowed the dust.
If we who sight along it round the world,
See nothing worthy to have been its mark,
It is because like men we look too near, Forgetting that as fitted to the sphere,
Our missiles always make too short an arc.
They fall, they rip the grass, they intersect
The curve of earth, and striking, break their own; They make us cringe for metal-point on stone. But this we know, the obstacle that checked
And tripped the body, shot the spirit on
Further than target ever showed or shone.


A Star In A Stoneboat
For Lincoln MacVeagh
Never tell me that not one star of all
That slip from heaven at night and softly fall Has been picked up with stones to build a wall.
Some laborer found one faded and stone-cold, And saving that its weight suggested gold
And tugged it from his first too certain hold,
He noticed nothing in it to remark.
He was not used to handling stars thrown dark And lifeless from an interrupted arc.
He did not recognize in that smooth coal The one thing palpable besides the soul To penetrate the air in which we roll.
He did not see how like a flying thing
It brooded ant eggs, and bad one large wing, One not so large for flying in a ring,
And a long Bird of Paradise's tail
(Though these when not in use to fly and trail It drew back in its body like a snail):
Nor know that be might move it from the spot— The harm was done: from having been star-shot The very nature of the soil was hot
And burning to yield flowers instead of grain, Flowers fanned and not put out by all the rain Poured on them by his prayers prayed in vain.
He moved it roughly with an iron bar,
He loaded an old stoneboat with the star And not, as you might think, a flying car,
Such as even poets would admit perforce


More practical than Pegasus the horse If it could put a star back in its course.
He dragged it through the plowed ground at a pace But faintly reminiscent of the race
Of jostling rock in interstellar space.
It went for building stone, and I, as though Commanded in a dream, forever go
To right the wrong that this should have been so.
Yet ask where else it could have gone as well, I do not know—I cannot stop to tell:
He might have left it lying where it fell.
From following walls I never lift my eye, Except at night to places in the sky Where showers of charted meteors let fly.
Some may know what they seek in school and church, And why they seek it there; for what I search
I must go measuring stone walls, perch on perch;
Sure that though not a star of death and birth, So not to be compared, perhaps, in worth
To such resorts of life as Mars and Earth—
Though not, I say, a star of death and sin, It yet has poles, and only needs a spin
To show its worldly nature and begin
To chafe and shuffle in my calloused palm And run off in strange tangents with my arm, As fish do with the line in first alarm.
Such as it is, it promises the prize
Of the one world complete in any size That I am like to compass, fool or wise.


A Time To Talk
When a friend calls to me from the road And slows his horse to a meaning walk, I don't stand still and look around
On all the hills I haven't hoed,
And shout from where I am, What is it? No, not as there is a time to talk.
I thrust my hoe in the mellow ground, Blade-end up and five feet tall,
And plod: I go up to the stone wall For a friendly visit.


A Winter Eden
A winter garden in an alder swamp,
Where conies now come out to sun and romp, As near a paradise as it can be
And not melt snow or start a dormant tree.
It lifts existence on a plane of snow
One level higher than the earth below, One level nearer heaven overhead,
And last year's berries shining scarlet red.
It lifts a gaunt luxuriating beast
Where he can stretch and hold his highest feat On some wild apple tree's young tender bark, What well may prove the year's high girdle mark.
So near to paradise all pairing ends:
Here loveless birds now flock as winter friends, Content with bud-inspecting. They presume
To say which buds are leaf and which are bloom.
A feather-hammer gives a double knock.
This Eden day is done at two o'clock.
An hour of winter day might seem too short
To make it worth life's while to wake and sport.


Acceptance
When the spent sun throws up its rays on cloud And goes down burning into the gulf below,
No voice in nature is heard to cry aloud
At what has happened. Birds, at least must know It is the change to darkness in the sky. Murmuring something quiet in her breast,
One bird begins to close a faded eye;
Or overtaken too far from his nest,
Hurrying low above the grove, some waif Swoops just in time to his remembered tree. At most he thinks or twitters softly, 'Safe! Now let the night be dark for all of me.
Let the night bee too dark for me to see Into the future. Let what will be, be.'


Acquainted With The Night
I have been one acquainted with the night.
I have walked out in rain - and back in rain. I have outwalked the furthest city light.
I have looked down the saddest city lane.
I have passed by the watchman on his beat And dropped my eyes, unwilling to explain.
I have stood still and stopped the sound of feet When far away an interrupted cry
Came over houses from another street,
But not to call me back or say good-bye; And further still at an unearthly height, One luminary clock against the sky
Proclaimed the time was neither wrong nor right. I have been one acquainted with the night.

After Apple Picking
My long two-pointed ladder's sticking through a tree Toward heaven still.
And there's a barrel that I didn't fill
Beside it, and there may be two or three
Apples I didn't pick upon some bough.
But I am done with apple-picking now.
Essence of winter sleep is on the night,
The scent of apples; I am drowsing off.
I cannot shake the shimmer from my sight
I got from looking through a pane of glass
I skimmed this morning from the water-trough, And held against the world of hoary grass.
It melted, and I let it fall and break. But I was well
Upon my way to sleep before it fell, And I could tell
What form my dreaming was about to take. Magnified apples appear and reappear, Stem end and blossom end,
And every fleck of russet showing clear.
My instep arch not only keeps the ache, It keeps the pressure of a ladder-round. And I keep hearing from the cellar-bin That rumbling sound
Of load on load of apples coming in.
For I have had too much
Of apple-picking; I am overtired
Of the great harvest I myself desired.
There were ten thousand thousand fruit to touch, Cherish in hand, lift down, and not let fall,
For all
That struck the earth,
No matter if not bruised, or spiked with stubble, Went surely to the cider-apple heap
As of no worth.
One can see what will trouble
This sleep of mine, whatever sleep it is.
Were he not gone,
The woodchuck could say whether it's like his


Long sleep, as I describe its coming on, Or just some human sleep.


An Empty Threat
I stay;
But it isn't as if
There wasn't always Hudson's Bay And the fur trade,
A small skiff
And a paddle blade.
I can just see my tent pegged,
And me on the floor,
Cross-legged,
And a trapper looking in at the door With furs to sell.
His name's Joe,
Alias John,
And between what he doesn't know And won't tell
About where Henry Hudson's gone, I can't say he's much help;
But we get on.
The seal yelp
On an ice cake.
It's not men by some mistake? No,
There's not a soul
For a windbreak
Between me and the North Pole—
Except always John-Joe,
My French Indian Esquimaux, And he's off setting traps
In one himself perhaps.
Give a headshake Over so much bay Thrown away
In snow and mist That doesn't exist,


I was going to say,
For God, man, or beast's sake, Yet does perhaps for all three.
Don't ask Joe
What it is to him.
It's sometimes dim
What it is to me,
Unless it be
It's the old captain's dark fate
Who failed to find or force a strait
In its two-thousand-mile coast;
And his crew left him where be failed, And nothing came of all be sailed.
It's to say, 'You and I—' To such a ghost—
You and I
Off here
With the dead race of the Great Auk!' And, 'Better defeat almost,
If seen clear,
Than life's victories of doubt
That need endless talk-talk To make them out.'


An Encounter
ONCE on the kind of day called &quot;weather breeder,&quot; When the heat slowly hazes and the sun
By its own power seems to be undone,
I was half boring through, half climbing through
A swamp of cedar. Choked with oil of cedar
And scurf of plants, and weary and over-heated,
And sorry I ever left the road I knew,
I paused and rested on a sort of hook
That had me by the coat as good as seated,
And since there was no other way to look,
Looked up toward heaven, and there against the blue,
Stood over me a resurrected tree,
A tree that had been down and raised again—
A barkless spectre. He had halted too,
As if for fear of treading upon me.
I saw the strange position of his hands—
Up at his shoulders, dragging yellow strands
Of wire with something in it from men to men.
&quot;You here?&quot; I said. &quot;Where aren't you nowadays And what's the news you carry—if you know?
And tell me where you're off for—Montreal?
Me? I'm not off for anywhere at all.
Sometimes I wander out of beaten ways
Half looking for the orchid Calypso.&quot;


An Old Man's Winter Night
All out of doors looked darkly in at him
Through the thin frost, almost in separate stars, That gathers on the pane in empty rooms.
What kept his eyes from giving back the gaze Was the lamp tilted near them in his hand.
What kept him from remembering what it was That brought him to that creaking room was age. He stood with barrels round him -- at a loss.
And having scared the cellar under him
In clomping there, he scared it once again
In clomping off; -- and scared the outer night, Which has its sounds, familiar, like the roar
Of trees and crack of branches, common things, But nothing so like beating on a box.
A light he was to no one but himself
Where now he sat, concerned with he knew what, A quiet light, and then not even that.
He consigned to the moon, such as she was,
So late-arising, to the broken moon
As better than the sun in any case
For such a charge, his snow upon the roof,
His icicles along the wall to keep;
And slept. The log that shifted with a jolt
Once in the stove, disturbed him and he shifted, And eased his heavy breathing, but still slept. One aged man -- one man -- can't keep a house, A farm, a countryside, or if he can,
It's thus he does it of a winter night.


Asking For Roses
A house that lacks, seemingly, mistress and master, With doors that none but the wind ever closes,
Its floor all littered with glass and with plaster;
It stands in a garden of old-fashioned roses.
I pass by that way in the gloaming with Mary; 'I wonder,' I say, 'who the owner of those is.' 'Oh, no one you know,' she answers me airy, 'But one we must ask if we want any roses.'
So we must join hands in the dew coming coldly There in the hush of the wood that reposes, And turn and go up to the open door boldly, And knock to the echoes as beggars for roses.
'Pray, are you within there, Mistress Who-were-you? ' 'Tis Mary that speaks and our errand discloses.
'Pray, are you within there? Bestir you, bestir you! 'Tis summer again; there's two come for roses.
'A word with you, that of the singer recalling- Old Herrick: a saying that every maid knows is A flower unplucked is but left to the falling, And nothing is gained by not gathering roses.'
We do not loosen our hands' intertwining
(Not caring so very much what she supposes) , There when she comes on us mistily shining And grants us by silence the boon of her roses.


Atmosphere
Inscription for a Garden Wall
Winds blow the open grassy places bleak; But where this old wall burns a sunny cheek, They eddy over it too toppling weak
To blow the earth or anything self-clear; Moisture and color and odor thicken here. The hours of daylight gather atmosphere.


Bereft
Where had I heard this wind before Change like this to a deeper roar?
What would it take my standing there for, Holding open a restive door,
Looking down hill to a frothy shore? Summer was past and the day was past. Sombre clouds in the west were massed. Out on the porch's sagging floor,
Leaves got up in a coil and hissed,
Blindly struck at my knee and missed. Something sinister in the tone
Told me my secret must be known:
Word I was in the house alone
Somehow must have gotten abroad, Word I was in my life alone,
Word I had no one left but God.


Birches
When I see birches bend to left and right
Across the lines of straighter darker trees,
I like to think some boy's been swinging them.
But swinging doesn't bend them down to stay.
Ice-storms do that. Often you must have seen them Loaded with ice a sunny winter morning
After a rain. They click upon themselves
As the breeze rises, and turn many-coloured
As the stir cracks and crazes their enamel.
Soon the sun's warmth makes them shed crystal shells Shattering and avalanching on the snow-crust
Such heaps of broken glass to sweep away
You'd think the inner dome of heaven had fallen.
They are dragged to the withered bracken by the load, And they seem not to break; though once they are bowed So low for long, they never right themselves:
You may see their trunks arching in the woods
Years afterwards, trailing their leaves on the ground,
Like girls on hands and knees that throw their hair
Before them over their heads to dry in the sun.
But I was going to say when Truth broke in
With all her matter-of-fact about the ice-storm,
I should prefer to have some boy bend them
As he went out and in to fetch the cows-
Some boy too far from town to learn baseball,
Whose only play was what he found himself,
Summer or winter, and could play alone.
One by one he subdued his father's trees
By riding them down over and over again
Until he took the stiffness out of them,
And not one but hung limp, not one was left
For him to conquer. He learned all there was
To learn about not launching out too soon
And so not carrying the tree away
Clear to the ground. He always kept his poise
To the top branches, climbing carefully
With the same pains you use to fill a cup
Up to the brim, and even above the brim.
Then he flung outward, feet first, with a swish,


Kicking his way down through the air to the ground. So was I once myself a swinger of birches.
And so I dream of going back to be.
It's when I'm weary of considerations,
And life is too much like a pathless wood
Where your face burns and tickles with the cobwebs Broken across it, and one eye is weeping
From a twig's having lashed across it open.
I'd like to get away from earth awhile
And then come back to it and begin over.
May no fate willfully misunderstand me
And half grant what I wish and snatch me away
Not to return. Earth's the right place for love:
I don't know where it's likely to go better.
I'd like to go by climbing a birch tree
And climb black branches up a snow-white trunk Toward heaven, till the tree could bear no more, But dipped its top and set me down again.
That would be good both going and coming back. One could do worse than be a swinger of birches.


Blueberries
'You ought to have seen what I saw on my way To the village, through Mortenson's pasture to-day: Blueberries as big as the end of your thumb, Real sky-blue, and heavy, and ready to drum In the cavernous pail of the first one to come! And all ripe together, not some of them green And some of them ripe! You ought to have seen! ' 'I don't know what part of the pasture you mean.' 'You know where they cut off the woods—let me see— It was two years ago—or no! —can it be No longer than that? —and the following fall The fire ran and burned it all up but the wall.' 'Why, there hasn't been time for the bushes to grow. That's always the way with the blueberries, though: There may not have been the ghost of a sign Of them anywhere under the shade of the pine, But get the pine out of the way, you may burn The pasture all over until not a fern Or grass-blade is left, not to mention a stick, And presto, they're up all around you as thick And hard to explain as a conjuror's trick.' 'It must be on charcoal they fatten their fruit. I taste in them sometimes the flavour of soot. And after all really they're ebony skinned: The blue's but a mist from the breath of the wind, A tarnish that goes at a touch of the hand, And less than the tan with which pickers are tanned.' 'Does Mortenson know what he has, do you think? ' 'He may and not care and so leave the chewink To gather them for him—you know what he is. He won't make the fact that they're rightfully his An excuse for keeping us other folk out.' 'I wonder you didn't see Loren about.' 'The best of it was that I did. Do you know, I was just getting through what the field had to show And over the wall and into the road, When who should come by, with a democrat-load Of all the young chattering Lorens alive, But Loren, the fatherly, out for a drive.' 'He saw you, then? What did he do? Did he frown? ' 'He just kept nodding his head up and down. You know how politely he always goes by. But he thought a big thought—I could tell by his eye— Which being expressed, might be this in effect: 'I have left those there berries, I shrewdly suspect, To ripen too long. I am greatly to blame.'' 'He's a thriftier person than some I could name.' 'He seems to be thrifty; and hasn't he need, With the mouths of all those young Lorens to feed? He has brought them all up on wild berries, they say, Like birds. They store a great many away. They eat them the year round, and those they don't eat They sell in the store and buy shoes for their feet.' 'Who cares what they say? It's a nice way to live, Just taking what Nature is willing to give, Not forcing her hand with harrow and plow.' 'I wish you had seen his perpetual bow— And the air of the youngsters! Not one of them turned, And they looked so solemn-absurdly concerned.' 'I wish I knew half what the flock of them know Of where all the berries and other things grow, Cranberries in bogs and raspberries on top Of the boulder-strewn mountain, and when they will crop. I met them one day and each had a flower Stuck into his berries as fresh as a shower; Some strange


kind—they told me it hadn't a name.' 'I've told you how once not long after we came, I almost provoked poor Loren to mirth By going to him of all people on earth To ask if he knew any fruit to be had For the picking. The rascal, he said he'd be glad To tell if he knew. But the year had been bad. There had been some berries—but those were all gone. He didn't say where they had been. He went on: 'I'm sure—I'm sure'—as polite as could be. He spoke to his wife in the door, 'Let me see, Mame, we don't know any good berrying place? ' It was all he could do to keep a straight face. 'If he thinks all the fruit that grows wild is for him, He'll find he's mistaken. See here, for a whim, We'll pick in the Mortensons' pasture this year. We'll go in the morning, that is, if it's clear, And the sun shines out warm: the vines must be wet. It's so long since I picked I almost forget How we used to pick berries: we took one look round, Then sank out of sight like trolls underground, And saw nothing more of each other, or heard, Unless when you said I was keeping a bird Away from its nest, and I said it was you. 'Well, one of us is.' For complaining it flew Around and around us. And then for a while We picked, till I feared you had wandered a mile, And I thought I had lost you. I lifted a shout Too loud for the distance you were, it turned out, For when you made answer, your voice was as low As talking—you stood up beside me, you know.' 'We sha'n't have the place to ourselves to enjoy— Not likely, when all the young Lorens deploy. They'll be there to-morrow, or even to-night. They won't be too friendly—they may be polite— To people they look on as having no right To pick where they're picking. But we won't complain. You ought to have seen how it looked in the rain, The fruit mixed with water in layers of leaves, Like two kinds of jewels, a vision for thieves.'

Blue-Butterfly Day
It is blue-butterfly day here in spring,
And with these sky-flakes down in flurry on flurry There is more unmixed color on the wing
Than flowers will show for days unless they hurry.
But these are flowers that fly and all but sing: And now from having ridden out desire
They lie closed over in the wind and cling Where wheels have freshly sliced the April mire.


Bond And Free
Love has earth to which she clings
With hills and circling arms about-
Wall within wall to shut fear out.
But Thought has need of no such things, For Thought has a pair of dauntless wings.
On snow and sand and turn, I see Where Love has left a printed trace With straining in the world's embrace. And such is Love and glad to be
But Thought has shaken his ankles free.
Thought cleaves the interstellar gloom And sits in Sirius' disc all night,
Till day makes him retrace his flight With smell of burning on every plume, Back past the sun to an earthly room.
His gains in heaven are what they are. Yet some say Love by being thrall
And simply staying possesses all
In several beauty that Thought fares far To find fused in another star.


Brown's Descent
Brown lived at such a lofty farm That everyone for miles could see His lantern when he did his chores In winter after half-past three.
And many must have seen him make
His wild descent from there one night, 'Cross lots, 'cross walls, 'cross everything, Describing rings of lantern light.
Between the house and barn the gale Got him by something he had on
And blew him out on the icy crust
That cased the world, and he was gone!
Walls were all buried, trees were few: He saw no stay unless he stove
A hole in somewhere with his heel. But though repeatedly he strove
And stamped and said things to himself, And sometimes something seemed to yield, He gained no foothold, but pursued
His journey down from field to field.
Sometimes he came with arms outspread Like wings, revolving in the scene
Upon his longer axis, and
With no small dignity of mien.
Faster or slower as he chanced,
Sitting or standing as he chose, According as he feared to risk
His neck, or thought to spare his clothes,
He never let the lantern drop.
And some exclaimed who saw afar The figures he described with it, &quot;I wonder what those signals are


Brown makes at such an hour of night! He's celebrating something strange.
I wonder if he's sold his farm,
Or been made Master of the Grange.&quot;
He reeled, he lurched, he bobbed, he checked; He fell and made the lantern rattle
(But saved the light from going out.)
So half-way down he fought the battle
Incredulous of his own bad luck.
And then becoming reconciled
To everything, he gave it up
And came down like a coasting child.
&quot;Well—I—be—&quot; that was all he said, As standing in the river road,
He looked back up the slippery slope
(Two miles it was) to his abode.
Sometimes as an authority
On motor-cars, I'm asked if I
Should say our stock was petered out, And this is my sincere reply:
Yankees are what they always were. Don't think Brown ever gave up hope Of getting home again because
He couldn't climb that slippery slope;
Or even thought of standing there Until the January thaw
Should take the polish off the crust. He bowed with grace to natural law,
And then went round it on his feet, After the manner of our stock;
Not much concerned for those to whom, At that particular time o'clock,
It must have looked as if the course
www.PoemHunter.com - The World's Poetry Archive 54

He steered was really straight away From that which he was headed for— Not much concerned for them, I say:
No more so than became a man— And politician at odd seasons.
I've kept Brown standing in the cold While I invested him with reasons;
But now he snapped his eyes three times; Then shook his lantern, saying, &quot;Ile's 'Bout out!&quot; and took the long way home By road, a matter of several miles.


But Outer Space
But outer Space, At least this far, For all the fuss
Of the populace Stays more popular Than populous


Canis Major
The great Overdog
That heavenly beast With a star in one eye Gives a leap in the east. He dances upright
All the way to the west
And never once drops
On his forefeet to rest.
I'm a poor underdog,
But to-night I will bark
With the great Overdog
That romps through the dark.


Carpe Diem
Age saw two quiet children
Go loving by at twilight,
He knew not whether homeward,
Or outward from the village,
Or (chimes were ringing) churchward, He waited, (they were strangers)
Till they were out of hearing
To bid them both be happy.
'Be happy, happy, happy,
And seize the day of pleasure.'
The age-long theme is Age's.
'Twas Age imposed on poems
Their gather-roses burden
To warn against the danger
That overtaken lovers
From being overflooded
With happiness should have it.
And yet not know they have it.
But bid life seize the present?
It lives less in the present
Than in the future always,
And less in both together
Than in the past. The present
Is too much for the senses,
Too crowding, too confusing-
Too present to imagine.


Christmas Trees
The city had withdrawn into itself
And left at last the country to the country;
When between whirls of snow not come to lie
And whirls of foliage not yet laid, there drove
A stranger to our yard, who looked the city,
Yet did in country fashion in that there
He sat and waited till he drew us out
A-buttoning coats to ask him who he was.
He proved to be the city come again
To look for something it had left behind
And could not do without and keep its Christmas.
He asked if I would sell my Christmas trees;
My woods—the young fir balsams like a place
Where houses all are churches and have spires.
I hadn’t thought of them as Christmas Trees.
I doubt if I was tempted for a moment
To sell them off their feet to go in cars
And leave the slope behind the house all bare,
Where the sun shines now no warmer than the moon. I’d hate to have them know it if I was.
Yet more I’d hate to hold my trees except
As others hold theirs or refuse for them,
Beyond the time of profitable growth,
The trial by market everything must come to.
I dallied so much with the thought of selling.
Then whether from mistaken courtesy
And fear of seeming short of speech, or whether From hope of hearing good of what was mine,
I said, “There aren’t enough to be worth while.”
“I could soon tell how many they would cut,
You let me look them over.”
“You could look.
But don’t expect I’m going to let you have them.” Pasture they spring in, some in clumps too close That lop each other of boughs, but not a few
Quite solitary and having equal boughs
All round and round. The latter he nodded “Yes” to, Or paused to say beneath some lovelier one,


With a buyer’s moderation, “That would do.”
I thought so too, but wasn’t there to say so.
We climbed the pasture on the south, crossed over, And came down on the north.
He said, “A thousand.”
“A thousand Christmas trees! —at what apiece? ”
He felt some need of softening that to me:
“A thousand trees would come to thirty dollars.”
Then I was certain I had never meant
To let him have them. Never show surprise!
But thirty dollars seemed so small beside
The extent of pasture I should strip, three cents (For that was all they figured out apiece) , Three cents so small beside the dollar friends
I should be writing to within the hour
Would pay in cities for good trees like those, Regular vestry-trees whole Sunday Schools Could hang enough on to pick off enough.
A thousand Christmas trees I didn’t know I had! Worth three cents more to give away than sell, As may be shown by a simple calculation.
Too bad I couldn’t lay one in a letter.
I can’t help wishing I could send you one,
In wishing you herewith a Merry Christmas.


Come In
As I came to the edge of the woods, Thrush music -- hark!
Now if it was dusk outside,
Inside it was dark.
Too dark in the woods for a bird By sleight of wing
To better its perch for the night, Though it still could sing.
The last of the light of the sun That had died in the west
Still lived for one song more In a thrush's breast.
Far in the pillared dark Thrush music went -- Almost like a call to come in To the dark and lament.
But no, I was out for stars; I would not come in.
I meant not even if asked; And I hadn't been.


Departmental
An ant on the tablecloth
Ran into a dormant moth
Of many times his size.
He showed not the least surprise. His business wasn't with such. He gave it scarcely a touch,
And was off on his duty run.
Yet if he encountered one
Of the hive's enquiry squad Whose work is to find out God And the nature of time and space, He would put him onto the case. Ants are a curious race;
One crossing with hurried tread The body of one of their dead Isn't given a moment's arrest- Seems not even impressed.
But he no doubt reports to any With whom he crosses antennae, And they no doubt report
To the higher-up at court.
Then word goes forth in Formic: 'Death's come to Jerry McCormic, Our selfless forager Jerry.
Will the special Janizary
Whose office it is to bury
The dead of the commissary
Go bring him home to his people. Lay him in state on a sepal.
Wrap him for shroud in a petal. Embalm him with ichor of nettle. This is the word of your Queen.' And presently on the scene Appears a solemn mortician;
And taking formal position,
With feelers calmly atwiddle, Seizes the dead by the middle, And heaving him high in air, Carries him out of there.


No one stands round to stare.
It is nobody else's affair
It couldn't be called ungentle
But how thoroughly departmental


Desert Places
Snow falling and night falling fast, oh, fast
In a field I looked into going past,
And the ground almost covered smooth in snow, But a few weeds and stubble showing last.
The woods around it have it - it is theirs. All animals are smothered in their lairs. I am too absent-spirited to count;
The loneliness includes me unawares.
And lonely as it is, that loneliness
Will be more lonely ere it will be less - A blanker whiteness of benighted snow WIth no expression, nothing to express.
They cannot scare me with their empty spaces Between stars - on stars where no human race is. I have it in me so much nearer home
To scare myself with my own desert places.


Design
I found a dimpled spider, fat and white, On a white heal-all, holding up a moth Like a white piece of rigid satin cloth -- Assorted characters of death and blight Mixed ready to begin the morning right, Like the ingredients of a witches' broth -- A snow-drop spider, a flower like a froth, And dead wings carried like a paper kite.
What had that flower to do with being white,
The wayside blue and innocent heal-all?
What brought the kindred spider to that height, Then steered the white moth thither in the night? What but design of darkness to appall?--
If design govern in a thing so small.

Devotion
The heart can think of no devotion Greater than being shore to ocean - Holding the curve of one position, Counting an endless repetition.


Directive
Back out of all this now too much for us,
Back in a time made simple by the loss
Of detail, burned, dissolved, and broken off Like graveyard marble sculpture in the weather, There is a house that is no more a house
Upon a farm that is no more a farm
And in a town that is no more a town.
The road there, if you'll let a guide direct you Who only has at heart your getting lost,
May seem as if it should have been a quarry - Great monolithic knees the former town
Long since gave up pretense of keeping covered. And there's a story in a book about it:
Besides the wear of iron wagon wheels
The ledges show lines ruled southeast-northwest, The chisel work of an enormous Glacier
That braced his feet against the Arctic Pole.
You must not mind a certain coolness from him Still said to haunt this side of Panther Mountain. Nor need you mind the serial ordeal
Of being watched from forty cellar holes
As if by eye pairs out of forty firkins.
As for the woods' excitement over you
That sends light rustle rushes to their leaves, Charge that to upstart inexperience.
Where were they all not twenty years ago?
They think too much of having shaded out
A few old pecker-fretted apple trees.
Make yourself up a cheering song of how Someone's road home from work this once was, Who may be just ahead of you on foot
Or creaking with a buggy load of grain.
The height of the adventure is the height
Of country where two village cultures faded
Into each other. Both of them are lost.
And if you're lost enough to find yourself
By now, pull in your ladder road behind you
And put a sign up CLOSED to all but me.
Then make yourself at home. The only field


Now left's no bigger than a harness gall.
First there's the children's house of make-believe, Some shattered dishes underneath a pine,
The playthings in the playhouse of the children. Weep for what little things could make them glad. Then for the house that is no more a house,
But only a belilaced cellar hole,
Now slowly closing like a dent in dough.
This was no playhouse but a house in earnest.
Your destination and your destiny's
A brook that was the water of the house,
Cold as a spring as yet so near its source,
Too lofty and original to rage.
(We know the valley streams that when aroused Will leave their tatters hung on barb and thorn.)
I have kept hidden in the instep arch
Of an old cedar at the waterside
A broken drinking goblet like the Grail
Under a spell so the wrong ones can't find it,
So can't get saved, as Saint Mark says they mustn't. (I stole the goblet from the children's playhouse.) Here are your waters and your watering place.
Drink and be whole again beyond confusion.


Dust in the Eyes
If, as they say, some dust thrown in my eyes Will keep my talk from getting overwise,
I'm not the one for putting off the proof.
Let it be overwhelming, off a roof
And round a corner, blizzard snow for dust, And blind me to a standstill if it must.


Dust Of Snow
The way a crow Shook down on me The dust of snow From a hemlock tree
Has given my heart A change of mood And saved some part Of a day I had rued.



Evening In A Sugar Orchard
From where I lingered in a lull in March
outside the sugar-house one night for choice,
I called the fireman with a careful voice
And bade him leave the pan and stoke the arch:
'O fireman, give the fire another stoke,
And send more sparks up chimney with the smoke.' I thought a few might tangle, as they did,
Among bare maple boughs, and in the rare
Hill atmosphere not cease to glow,
And so be added to the moon up there.
The moon, though slight, was moon enough to show On every tree a bucket with a lid,
And on black ground a bear-skin rug of snow.
The sparks made no attempt to be the moon.
They were content to figure in the trees
As Leo, Orion, and the Pleiades.
And that was what the boughs were full of soon.


Fire And Ice
Some say the world will end in fire, Some say in ice.
From what I've tasted of desire
I hold with those who favor fire. But if it had to perish twice,
I think I know enough of hate To say that for destruction ice Is also great
And would suffice.

Fireflies In The Garden
Here come real stars to fill the upper skies, And here on earth come emulating flies, That though they never equal stars in size, (And they were never really stars at heart) Achieve at times a very star-like start. Only, of course, they can't sustain the part.


Flower-Gathering
I left you in the morning, And in the morning glow, You walked a way beside me To make me sad to go.
Do you know me in the gloaming,
Gaunt and dusty gray with roaming?
Are you dumb because you know me not, Or dumb because you know?
All for me And not a question
For the faded flowers gay
That could take me from beside you For the ages of a day?
They are yours, and be the measure Of their worth for you to treasure, The measure of the little while
That I've been long away.


For Once, Then, Something
Others taught me with having knelt at well-curbs Always wrong to the light, so never seeing Deeper down in the well than where the water Gives me back in a shining surface picture
Me myself in the summer heaven godlike
Looking out of a wreath of fern and cloud puffs.
Once, when trying with chin against a well-curb,
I discerned, as I thought, beyond the picture, Through the picture, a something white, uncertain, Something more of the depths--and then I lost it. Water came to rebuke the too clear water.
One drop fell from a fern, and lo, a ripple
Shook whatever it was lay there at bottom,
Blurred it, blotted it out. What was that whiteness? Truth? A pebble of quartz? For once, then, something.

Fragmentary Blue
Why make so much of fragmentary blue
In here and there a bird, or butterfly,
Or flower, or wearing-stone, or open eye, When heaven presents in sheets the solid hue?
Since earth is earth, perhaps, not heaven (as yet)-- Though some savants make earth include the sky; And blue so far above us comes so high,
It only gives our wish for blue a whet.


Gathering Leaves
Spades take up leaves No better than spoons, And bags full of leaves Are light as balloons.
I make a great noise Of rustling all day Like rabbit and deer Running away.
But the mountains I raise Elude my embrace, Flowing over my arms And into my face.
I may load and unload Again and again
Till I fill the whole shed, And what have I then?
Next to nothing for weight, And since they grew duller From contact with earth, Next to nothing for color.
Next to nothing for use. But a crop is a crop, And who's to say where The harvest shall stop?


Ghost House
I dwell in a lonely house I know
That vanished many a summer ago,
And left no trace but the cellar walls,
And a cellar in which the daylight falls,
And the purple-stemmed wild raspberries grow.
O'er ruined fences the grape-vines shield
The woods come back to the mowing field;
The orchard tree has grown one copse
Of new wood and old where the woodpecker chops; The footpath down to the well is healed.
I dwell with a strangely aching heart
In that vanished abode there far apart
On that disused and forgotten road
That has no dust-bath now for the toad. Night comes; the black bats tumble and dart;
The whippoorwill is coming to shout And hush and cluck and flutter about: I hear him begin far enough away Full many a time to say his say Before he arrives to say it out.
It is under the small, dim, summer star.
I know not who these mute folk are
Who share the unlit place with me--
Those stones out under the low-limbed tree Doubtless bear names that the mosses mar.
They are tireless folk, but slow and sad, Though two, close-keeping, are lass and lad,-- With none among them that ever sings,
And yet, in view of how many things,
As sweet companions as might be had.


God's Garden
God made a beatous garden
With lovely flowers strown,
But one straight, narrow pathway That was not overgrown.
And to this beauteous garden
He brought mankind to live,
And said: 'To you, my children, These lovely flowers I give.
Prune ye my vines and fig trees, With care my flowerets tend,
But keep the pathway open
Your home is at the end.'
Then came another master,
Who did not love mankind,
And planted on the pathway
Gold flowers for them to find.
And mankind saw the bright flowers, That, glitt'ring in the sun,
Quite hid the thorns of av'rice
That poison blood and bone;
And far off many wandered,
And when life's night came on, They still were seeking gold flowers, Lost, helpless and alone.
O, cease to heed the glamour That blinds your foolish eyes, Look upward to the glitter
Of stars in God's clear skies.
Their ways are pure and harmless And will not lead astray,
Bid aid your erring footsteps
To keep the narrow way.
And when the sun shines brightly Tend flowers that God has given And keep the pathway open
That leads you on to heaven.

Going For Water
The well was dry beside the door,
And so we went with pail and can
Across the fields behind the house
To seek the brook if still it ran;
Not loth to have excuse to go,
Because the autumn eve was fair
(Though chill), because the fields were ours, And by the brook our woods were there.
We ran as if to meet the moon
That slowly dawned behind the trees, The barren boughs without the leaves, Without the birds, without the breeze.
But once within the wood, we paused Like gnomes that hid us from the moon, Ready to run to hiding new
With laughter when she found us soon.
Each laid on other a staying hand
To listen ere we dared to look,
And in the hush we joined to make
We heard, we knew we heard the brook.
A note as from a single place,
A slender tinkling fall that made Now drops that floated on the pool Like pearls, and now a silver blade.


Good Hours
I had for my winter evening walk- No one at all with whom to talk, But I had the cottages in a row Up to their shining eyes in snow.
And I thought I had the folk within:
I had the sound of a violin;
I had a glimpse through curtain laces Of youthful forms and youthful faces.
I had such company outward bound.
I went till there were no cottages found. I turned and repented, but coming back I saw no window but that was black.
Over the snow my creaking feet Disturbed the slumbering village street Like profanation, by your leave,
At ten o'clock of a winter eve.


Good-Bye, And Keep Cold
This saying good-bye on the edge of the dark And cold to an orchard so young in the bark Reminds me of all that can happen to harm An orchard away at the end of the farm
All winter, cut off by a hill from the house.
I don't want it girdled by rabbit and mouse,
I don't want it dreamily nibbled for browse
By deer, and I don't want it budded by grouse.
(If certain it wouldn't be idle to call
I'd summon grouse, rabbit, and deer to the wall And warn them away with a stick for a gun.)
I don't want it stirred by the heat of the sun.
(We made it secure against being, I hope,
By setting it out on a northerly slope.)
No orchard's the worse for the wintriest storm;
But one thing about it, it mustn't get warm.
"How often already you've had to be told,
Keep cold, young orchard. Good-bye and keep cold. Dread fifty above more than fifty below."
I have to be gone for a season or so.
My business awhile is with different trees,
Less carefully nourished, less fruitful than these, And such as is done to their wood with an axe-- Maples and birches and tamaracks.
I wish I could promise to lie in the night
And think of an orchard's arboreal plight
When slowly (and nobody comes with a light)
Its heart sinks lower under the sod.


Hannibal
Was there even a cause too lost,
Ever a cause that was lost too long,
Or that showed with the lapse of time to vain For the generous tears of youth and song?


Home Burial
He saw her from the bottom of the stairs Before she saw him. She was starting down, Looking back over her shoulder at some fear. She took a doubtful step and then undid it
To raise herself and look again. He spoke Advancing toward her: "What is it you see From up there always? -- for I want to know." She turned and sank upon her skirts at that, And her face changed from terrified to dull.
He said to gain time: "What is it you see?" Mounting until she cowered under him.
"I will find out now -- you must tell me, dear." She, in her place, refused him any help,
With the least stiffening of her neck and silence. She let him look, sure that he wouldn't see, Blind creature; and a while he didn't see.
But at last he murmured, "Oh" and again, "Oh."
"What is it -- what?" she said.
"Just that I see."
"You don't," she challenged. "Tell me what it is."
"The wonder is I didn't see at once.
I never noticed it from here before.
I must be wonted to it -- that's the reason.
The little graveyard where my people are!
So small the window frames the whole of it.
Not so much larger than a bedroom, is it?
There are three stones of slate and one of marble, Broad-shouldered little slabs there in the sunlight On the sidehill. We haven't to mind those.
But I understand: it is not the stones,
But the child's mound ----"
"Don't, don't, don't, don't," she cried.


She withdrew, shrinking from beneath his arm That rested on the banister, and slid downstairs; And turned on him with such a daunting look, He said twice over before he knew himself: "Can't a man speak of his own child he's lost?"
"Not you! -- Oh, where's my hat? Oh, I don't need it! I must get out of here. I must get air.--
I don't know rightly whether any man can."
"Amy! Don't go to someone else this time.
Listen to me. I won't come down the stairs."
He sat and fixed his chin between his fists. "There's something I should like to ask you, dear."
"You don't know how to ask it." "Help me, then."
Her fingers moved the latch for all reply.
"My words are nearly always an offense.
I don't know how to speak of anything
So as to please you. But I might be taught, I should suppose. I can't say I see how.
A man must partly give up being a man
With womenfolk. We could have some arrangement By which I'd bind myself to keep hands off
Anything special you're a-mind to name.
Though I don't like such things 'twixt those that love. Two that don't love can't live together without them. But two that do can't live together with them."
She moved the latch a little. "Don't -- don't go.
Don't carry it to someone else this time.
Tell me about it if it's something human.
Let me into your grief. I'm not so much
Unlike other folks as your standing there
Apart would make me out. Give me my chance.
I do think, though, you overdo it a little.
What was it brought you up to think it the thing
To take your mother-loss of a first child
So inconsolably -- in the face of love.
You'd think his memory might be satisfied ----"


"There you go sneering now!"
"I'm not, I'm not!
You make me angry. I'll come down to you. God, what a woman! And it's come to this,
A man can't speak of his own child that's dead."
"You can't because you don't know how to speak.
If you had any feelings, you that dug
With your own hand -- how could you? -- his little grave; I saw you from that very window there,
Making the gravel leap and leap in air,
Leap up, like that, like that, and land so lightly
And roll back down the mound beside the hole.
I thought, Who is that man? I didn't know you.
And I crept down the stairs and up the stairs
To look again, and still your spade kept lifting.
Then you came in. I heard your rumbling voice
Out in the kitchen, and I don't know why,
But I went near to see with my own eyes.
You could sit there with the stains on your shoes
Of the fresh earth from your own baby's grave
And talk about your everyday concerns.
You had stood the spade up against the wall
Outside there in the entry, for I saw it."
"I shall laugh the worst laugh I ever laughed. I'm cursed. God, if I don't believe I'm cursed."
"I can repeat the very words you were saying: 'Three foggy mornings and one rainy day
Will rot the best birch fence a man can build.' Think of it, talk like that at such a time!
What had how long it takes a birch to rot
To do with what was in the darkened parlour? You couldn't care! The nearest friends can go With anyone to death, comes so far short
They might as well not try to go at all.
No, from the time when one is sick to death, One is alone, and he dies more alone.
Friends make pretense of following to the grave,


But before one is in it, their minds are turned And making the best of their way back to life And living people, and things they understand. But the world's evil. I won't have grief so
If I can change it. Oh, I won't, I won't!"
"There, you have said it all and you feel better. You won't go now. You're crying. Close the door. The heart's gone out of it: why keep it up?
Amyl There's someone coming down the road!"
"You -- oh, you think the talk is all. I must go -- Somewhere out of this house. How can I make you ----"
"If -- you -- do!" She was opening the door wider. "Where do you mean to go? First tell me that.
I'll follow and bring you back by force. I will! --"


Hyla Brook
By June our brook's run out of song and speed. Sought for much after that, it will be found Either to have gone groping underground
(And taken with it all the Hyla breed
That shouted in the mist a month ago,
Like ghost of sleigh-bells in a ghost of snow)-- Or flourished and come up in jewel-weed, Weak foliage that is blown upon and bent Even against the way its waters went.
Its bed is left a faded paper sheet
Of dead leaves stuck together by the heat--
A brook to none but who remember long.
This as it will be seen is other far
Than with brooks taken otherwhere in song. We love the things we love for what they are.


I Will Sing You One-O
It was long I lay
Awake that night Wishing that night Would name the hour And tell me whether
To call it day
(Though not yet light) And give up sleep.
The snow fell deep With the hiss of spray; Two winds would meet, One down one street, One down another, And fight in a smother Of dust and feather.
I could not say,
But feared the cold Had checked the pace Of the tower clock
By tying together
Its hands of gold Before its face.
Then cane one knock!
A note unruffled
Of earthly weather,
Though strange and muffled. The tower said, 'One!'
And then a steeple.
They spoke to themselves And such few people
As winds might rouse From sleeping warm
(But not unhouse).
They left the storm
That struck en masse
My window glass
Like a beaded fur.
In that grave One


They spoke of the sun And moon and stars, Saturn and Mars
And Jupiter.
Still more unfettered, They left the named
And spoke of the lettered, The sigmas and taus
Of constellations.
They filled their throats With the furthest bodies To which man sends his Speculation,
Beyond which God is;
The cosmic motes
Of yawning lenses.
Their solemn peals
Were not their own:
They spoke for the clock With whose vast wheels Theirs interlock.
In that grave word Uttered alone
The utmost star
Trembled and stirred, Though set so far
Its whirling frenzies Appear like standing
in one self station.
It has not ranged,
And save for the wonder Of once expanding
To be a nova,
It has not changed
To the eye of man
On planets over
Around and under
It in creation
Since man began
To drag down man
And nation nation.

Immigrants
No ship of all that under sail or steam
Have gathered people to us more and more But Pilgrim-manned the Mayflower in a dream Has been her anxious convoy in to shore.


In A Disused Graveyard
The living come with grassy tread
To read the gravestones on the hill; The graveyard draws the living still, But never anymore the dead.
The verses in it say and say:
"The ones who living come today
To read the stones and go away Tomorrow dead will come to stay." So sure of death the marbles rhyme, Yet can't help marking all the time How no one dead will seem to come. What is it men are shrinking from?
It would be easy to be clever
And tell the stones: Men hate to die And have stopped dying now forever. I think they would believe the lie.


In A Poem
The sentencing goes blithely on its way And takes the playfully objected rhyme As surely as it takes the stroke and time In having its undeviable say.


In A Vale
When I was young, we dwelt in a vale By a misty fen that rang all night, And thus it was the maidens pale
I knew so well, whose garments trail Across the reeds to a window light. The fen had every kind of bloom,
And for every kind there was a face,
And a voice that has sounded in my room Across the sill from the outer gloom.
Each came singly unto her place,
But all came every night with the mist;
And often they brought so much to say
Of things of moment to which, they wist,
One so lonely was fain to list,
That the stars were almost faded away
Before the last went, heavy with dew,
Back to the place from which she came- Where the bird was before it flew,
Where the flower was before it grew,
Where bird and flower were one and the same. And thus it is I know so well
Why the flower has odor, the bird has song. You have only to ask me, and I can tell.
No, not vainly there did I dwell,
Nor vainly listen all the night long.


In Equal Sacrifice
Thus of old the Douglas did:
He left his land as he was bid
With the royal heart of Robert the Bruce In a golden case with a golden lid,
To carry the same to the Holy Land;
By which we see and understand
That that was the place to carry a heart At loyalty and love's command,
And that was the case to carry it in.
The Douglas had not far to win
Before he came to the land of Spain, Where long a holy war had been
Against the too-victorious Moor;
And there his courage could not endure Not to strike a blow for God
Before he made his errand sure.
And ever it was intended so,
That a man for God should strike a blow, No matter the heart he has in charge
For the Holy Land where hearts should go. But when in battle the foe were met,
The Douglas found him sore beset,
With only strength of the fighting arm
For one more battle passage yet-
And that as vain to save the day
As bring his body safe away-
Only a signal deed to do
And a last sounding word to say.
The heart he wore in a golden chain
He swung and flung forth into the plain, And followed it crying 'Heart or death!' And fighting over it perished fain.
So may another do of right,
Give a heart to the hopeless fight,
The more of right the more he loves;
So may another redouble might
For a few swift gleams of the angry brand, Scorning greatly not to demand
In equal sacrifice with his


The heart he bore to the Holy Land.

In Hardwood Groves
The same leaves over and over again! They fall from giving shade above
To make one texture of faded brown And fit the earth like a leather glove.
Before the leaves can mount again
To fill the trees with another shade,
They must go down past things coming up. They must go down into the dark decayed.
They must be pierced by flowers and put Beneath the feet of dancing flowers. However it is in some other world
I know that this is way in ours.


In Neglect
They leave us so to the way we took, As two in whom them were proved mistaken, That we sit sometimes in the wayside nook, With michievous, vagrant, seraphic look, And try if we cannot feel forsaken.


In The Home Stretch
SHE stood against the kitchen sink, and looked Over the sink out through a dusty window
At weeds the water from the sink made tall. She wore her cape; her hat was in her hand. Behind her was confusion in the room,
Of chairs turned upside down to sit like people
In other chairs, and something, come to look,
For every room a house has—parlor, bed-room, And dining-room—thrown pell-mell in the kitchen. And now and then a smudged, infernal face Looked in a door behind her and addressed
Her back. She always answered without turning.
&quot;Where will I put this walnut bureau, lady?&quot; &quot;Put it on top of something that's on top
Of something else,&quot; she laughed. &quot;Oh, put it where You can to-night, and go. It's almost dark;
You must be getting started back to town.&quot;
Another blackened face thrust in and looked
And smiled, and when she did not turn, spoke gently, &quot;What are you seeing out the window, lady?&quot;
&quot;Never was I beladied so before. Would evidence of having been called lady More than so many times make me a lady In common law, I wonder.&quot;
&quot;But I ask,
What are you seeing out the window, lady?&quot;
&quot;What I'll be seeing more of in the years To come as here I stand and go the round
Of many plates with towels many times.&quot;
&quot;And what is that? You only put me off.&quot;
&quot;Rank weeds that love the water from the dish-pan More than some women like the dish-pan, Joe;
A little stretch of mowing-field for you;
www.PoemHunter.com - The World's Poetry Archive 101

Not much of that until I come to woods That end all. And it's scarce enough to call A view.&quot;
&quot;And yet you think you like it, dear?&quot;
&quot;That's what you're so concerned to know! You hope I like it. Bang goes something big away
Off there upstairs. The very tread of men
As great as those is shattering to the frame
Of such a little house. Once left alone,
You and I, dear, will go with softer steps
Up and down stairs and through the rooms, and none But sudden winds that snatch them from our hands Will ever slam the doors.&quot;
&quot;I think you see
More than you like to own to out that window.&quot;
&quot;No; for besides the things I tell you of, I only see the years. They come and go
In alternation with the weeds, the field,
The wood.&quot;
&quot;What kind of years?&quot; &quot;Why, latter years— Different from early years.&quot; &quot;I see them, too.
You didn't count them?&quot;
&quot;No, the further off
So ran together that I didn't try to.
It can scarce be that they would be in number We'd care to know, for we are not young now.
And bang goes something else away off there.
It sounds as if it were the men went down,
And every crash meant one less to return
To lighted city streets we, too, have known,
But now are giving up for country darkness.&quot;
&quot;Come from that window where you see too much for me, And take a livelier view of things from here.
They're going. Watch this husky swarming up


Over the wheel into the sky-high seat,
Lighting his pipe now, squinting down his nose
At the flame burning downward as he sucks it.&quot;
&quot;See how it makes his nose-side bright, a proof How dark it's getting. Can you tell what time
It is by that? Or by the moon? The new moon!
What shoulder did I see her over? Neither.
A wire she is of silver, as new as we
To everything. Her light won't last us long.
It's something, though, to know we're going to have her Night after night and stronger every night
To see us through our first two weeks. But, Joe,
The stove! Before they go! Knock on the window;
Ask them to help you get it on its feet.
We stand here dreaming. Hurry! Call them back!&quot;
&quot;They're not gone yet.&quot;
&quot;We've got to have the stove, Whatever else we want for. And a light. Have we a piece of candle if the lamp And oil are buried out of reach?&quot; Again
The house was full of tramping, and the dark,
Door-filling men burst in and seized the stove.
A cannon-mouth-like hole was in the wall,
To which they set it true by eye; and then
Came up the jointed stovepipe in their hands,
So much too light and airy for their strength
It almost seemed to come ballooning up,
Slipping from clumsy clutches toward the ceiling.
&quot;A fit!&quot; said one, and banged a stovepipe shoulder. &quot;It's good luck when you move in to begin
With good luck with your stovepipe. Never mind,
It's not so bad in the country, settled down,
When people 're getting on in life, You'll like it.&quot; Joe said: &quot;You big boys ought to find a farm, And make good farmers, and leave other fellows
The city work to do. There's not enough
For everybody as it is in there.&quot;
&quot;God!&quot; one said wildly, and, when no one spoke:
www.PoemHunter.com - The World's Poetry Archive 103

&quot;Say that to Jimmy here. He needs a farm.&quot;
But Jimmy only made his jaw recede
Fool-like, and rolled his eyes as if to say
He saw himself a farmer. Then there was a French boy
Who said with seriousness that made them laugh,
&quot;Ma friend, you ain't know what it is you're ask.&quot; He doffed his cap and held it with both hands
Across his chest to make as 'twere a bow: &quot;We're giving you our chances on de farm.&quot; And then they all turned to with deafening boots
And put each other bodily out of the house. &quot;Goodby to them! We puzzle them. They think— I don't know what they think we see in what
They leave us to: that pasture slope that seems
The back some farm presents us; and your woods
To northward from your window at the sink,
Waiting to steal a step on us whenever
We drop our eyes or turn to other things,
As in the game ‘Ten-step' the children play.&quot;
&quot;Good boys they seemed, and let them love the city. All they could say was ‘God!' when you proposed
Their coming out and making useful farmers.&quot;
&quot;Did they make something lonesome go through you? It would take more than them to sicken you—
Us of our bargain. But they left us so
As to our fate, like fools past reasoning with.
They almost shook me.&quot;
&quot;It's all so much
What we have always wanted, I confess
It's seeming bad for a moment makes it seem
Even worse still, and so on down, down, down.
It's nothing; it's their leaving us at dusk.
I never bore it well when people went.
The first night after guests have gone, the house
Seems haunted or exposed. I always take
A personal interest in the locking up
At bedtime; but the strangeness soon wears off.&quot;
He fetched a dingy lantern from behind
A door. &quot;There's that we didn't lose! And these!&quot;—


Some matches he unpocketed. &quot;For food— The meals we've had no one can take from us.
I wish that everything on earth were just
As certain as the meals we've had. I wish
The meals we haven't had were, anyway.
What have you you know where to lay your hands on?&quot;
&quot;The bread we bought in passing at the store. There's butter somewhere, too.&quot;
&quot;Let's rend the bread.
I'll light the fire for company for you;
You'll not have any other company
Till Ed begins to get out on a Sunday
To look us over and give us his idea
Of what wants pruning, shingling, breaking up. He'll know what he would do if he were we, And all at once. He'll plan for us and plan
To help us, but he'll take it out in planning. Well, you can set the table with the loaf.
Let's see you find your loaf. I'll light the fire.
I like chairs occupying other chairs
Not offering a lady—&quot;
&quot;There again, Joe! You're tired.&quot;
&quot;I'm drunk-nonsensical tired out;
Don't mind a word I say. It's a day's work
To empty one house of all household goods
And fill another with 'em fifteen miles away,
Although you do no more than dump them down.&quot;
&quot;Dumped down in paradise we are and happy.&quot;
&quot;It's all so much what I have always wanted, I can't believe it's what you wanted, too.&quot;
&quot;Shouldn't you like to know?&quot;
&quot;I'd like to know
If it is what you wanted, then how much
www.PoemHunter.com - The World's Poetry Archive 105

You wanted it for me.&quot;
&quot;A troubled conscience!
You don't want me to tell if I don't know.&quot;
&quot;I don't want to find out what can't be known. But who first said the word to come?&quot;
&quot;My dear,
It's who first thought the thought. You're searching, Joe, For things that don't exist; I mean beginnings.
Ends and beginnings—there are no such things.
There are only middles.&quot;
&quot;What is this?&quot;
&quot;This life?
Our sitting here by lantern-light together Amid the wreckage of a former home? You won't deny the lantern isn't new. The stove is not, and you are not to me, Nor I to you.&quot;
&quot;Perhaps you never were?&quot;
&quot;It would take me forever to recite
All that's not new in where we find ourselves.
New is a word for fools in towns who think
Style upon style in dress and thought at last
Must get somewhere. I've heard you say as much. No, this is no beginning.&quot;
&quot;Then an end?&quot;
&quot;End is a gloomy word.&quot;
&quot;Is it too late
To drag you out for just a good-night call
On the old peach trees on the knoll to grope
By starlight in the grass for a last peach
The neighbors may not have taken as their right When the house wasn't lived in? I've been looking: I doubt if they have left us many grapes.


Before we set ourselves to right the house, The first thing in the morning, out we go
To go the round of apple, cherry, peach, Pine, alder, pasture, mowing, well, and brook. All of a farm it is.&quot;
&quot;I know this much:
I'm going to put you in your bed, if first
I have to make you build it. Come, the light.&quot;
When there was no more lantern in the kitchen, The fire got out through crannies in the stove
And danced in yellow wrigglers on the ceiling,
As much at home as if they'd always danced there.


In White
A dented spider like a snow drop white
On a white Heal-all, holding up a moth Like a white piece of lifeless satin cloth - Saw ever curious eye so strange a sight? - Portent in little, assorted death and blight Like the ingredients of a witches' broth? - The beady spider, the flower like a froth, And the moth carried like a paper kite.
What had that flower to do with being white, The blue prunella every child's delight.
What brought the kindred spider to that height? (Make we no thesis of the miller's plight.)
What but design of darkness and of night? Design, design! Do I use the word aright?


Into My Own
One of my wishes is that those dark trees,
So old and firm they scarcely show the breeze, Were not, as 'twere, the merest mask of gloom, But stretched away unto the edge of doom.
I should not be withheld but that some day
into their vastness I should steal away,
Fearless of ever finding open land,
or highway where the slow wheel pours the sand.
I do not see why I should e'er turn back,
Or those should not set forth upon my track To overtake me, who should miss me here And long to know if still I held them dear.
They would not find me changed from him they knew-- Only more sure of all I though was true.


Iota Subscript
Seek not in me the big I capital,
Not yet the little dotted in me seek.
If I have in me any I at all,
'Tis the iota subscript of the Greek.
So small am I as an attention beggar. The letter you will find me subscript to Is neither alpha, eta, nor omega,
But upsilon which is the Greek for you.


Iris By Night
One misty evening, one another's guide,
We two were groping down a Malvern side The last wet fields and dripping hedges home. There came a moment of confusing lights, Such as according to belief in Rome
Were seen of old at Memphis on the heights Before the fragments of a former sun
Could concentrate anew and rise as one. Light was a paste of pigment in our eyes.
And then there was a moon and then a scene So watery as to seem submarine;
In which we two stood saturated, drowned. The clover-mingled rowan on the ground
Had taken all the water it could as dew,
And still the air was saturated too,
Its airy pressure turned to water weight. Then a small rainbow like a trellis gate,
A very small moon-made prismatic bow, Stood closely over us through which to go. And then we were vouchsafed a miracle
That never yet to other two befell
And I alone of us have lived to tell.
A wonder! Bow and rainbow as it bent, Instead of moving with us as we went
(To keep the pots of gold from being found), It lifted from its dewy pediment
Its two mote-swimming many-colored ends And gathered them together in a ring.
And we stood in it softly circled round
From all division time or foe can bring
In a relation of elected friends.


Leaves Compared With Flowers
A tree's leaves may be ever so good,
So may its bar, so may its wood;
But unless you put the right thing to its root It never will show much flower or fruit.
But I may be one who does not care Ever to have tree bloom or bear. Leaves for smooth and bark for rough, Leaves and bark may be tree enough.
Some giant trees have bloom so small They might as well have none at all. Late in life I have come on fern.
Now lichens are due to have their turn.
I bade men tell me which in brief, Which is fairer, flower or leaf.
They did not have the wit to say, Leaves by night and flowers by day.
Leaves and bar, leaves and bark,
To lean against and hear in the dark. Petals I may have once pursued. Leaves are all my darker mood.


Locked Out
As told to a child
When we locked up the house at night,
We always locked the flowers outside
And cut them off from window light.
The time I dreamed the door was tried
And brushed with buttons upon sleeves, The flowers were out there with the thieves. Yet nobody molested them!
We did find one nasturtium
Upon the steps with bitten stem.
I may have been to blame for that:
I always thought it must have been Some Hower I played with as I sat
At dusk to watch the moon down early.


Lodged
The rain to the wind said,
'You push and I'll pelt.'
They so smote the garden bed That the flowers actually knelt, And lay lodged - though not dead. I know how the flowers felt.


Looking for a Sunset Bird in Winter
The west was getting out of gold,
The breath of air had died of cold, When shoeing home across the white, I thought I saw a bird alight.
In summer when I passed the place I had to stop and lift my face;
A bird with an angelic gift
Was singing in it sweet and swift.
No bird was singing in it now.
A single leaf was on a bough, And that was all there was to see In going twice around the tree.
From my advantage on a hill
I judged that such a crystal chill Was only adding frost to snow
As gilt to gold that wouldn't show.
A brush had left a crooked stroke
Of what was either cloud or smoke From north to south across the blue; A piercing little star was through.


Love And A Question
A stranger came to the door at eve,
And he spoke the bridegroom fair.
He bore a green-white stick in his hand, And, for all burden, care.
He asked with the eyes more than the lips For a shelter for the night,
And he turned and looked at the road afar Without a window light.
The bridegroom came forth into the porch With, 'Let us look at the sky,
And question what of the night to be, Stranger, you and I.'
The woodbine leaves littered the yard, The woodbine berries were blue, Autumn, yes, winter was in the wind; 'Stranger, I wish I knew.'
Within, the bride in the dusk alone Bent over the open fire,
Her face rose-red with the glowing coal And the thought of the heart's desire.
The bridegroom looked at the weary road, Yet saw but her within,
And wished her heart in a case of gold And pinned with a silver pin.
The bridegroom thought it little to give A dole of bread, a purse,
A heartfelt prayer for the poor of God, Or for the rich a curse;
But whether or not a man was asked To mar the love of two
By harboring woe in the bridal house, The bridegroom wished he knew.


Maple
Her teacher's certainty it must be Mabel
Made Maple first take notice of her name.
She asked her father and he told her, 'Maple— Maple is right.'
'But teacher told the school
There's no such name.'
'Teachers don't know as much
As fathers about children, you tell teacher.
You tell her that it's M-A-P-L-E.
You ask her if she knows a maple tree.
Well, you were named after a maple tree.
Your mother named you. You and she just saw Each other in passing in the room upstairs,
One coming this way into life, and one
Going the other out of life—you know?
So you can't have much recollection of her.
She had been having a long look at you.
She put her finger in your cheek so hard
It must have made your dimple there, and said, 'Maple.' I said it too: 'Yes, for her name.'
She nodded. So we're sure there's no mistake. I don't know what she wanted it to mean,
But it seems like some word she left to bid you Be a good girl—be like a maple tree.
How like a maple tree's for us to guess.
Or for a little girl to guess sometime.
Not now—at least I shouldn't try too hard now. By and by I will tell you all I know
About the different trees, and something, too, About your mother that perhaps may help.' Dangerous self-arousing words to sow.
Luckily all she wanted of her name then
Was to rebuke her teacher with it next day, And give the teacher a scare as from her father. Anything further had been wasted on her,
Or so he tried to think to avoid blame.
She would forget it. She all but forgot it.
What he sowed with her slept so long a sleep, And came so near death in the dark of years,


That when it woke and came to life again
The flower was different from the parent seed.
It carne back vaguely at the glass one day,
As she stood saying her name over aloud,
Striking it gently across her lowered eyes
To make it go well with the way she looked.
What was it about her name? Its strangeness lay In having too much meaning. Other names,
As Lesley, Carol, Irma, Marjorie,
Signified nothing. Rose could have a meaning,
But hadn't as it went. (She knew a Rose.)
This difference from other names it was
Made people notice it—and notice her.
(They either noticed it, or got it wrong.)
Her problem was to find out what it asked
In dress or manner of the girl who bore it.
If she could form some notion of her mother— What she bad thought was lovely, and what good. This was her mother's childhood home;
The house one story high in front, three stories
On the end it presented to the road.
(The arrangement made a pleasant sunny cellar.) Her mother's bedroom was her father's still,
Where she could watch her mother's picture fading. Once she found for a bookmark in the Bible
A maple leaf she thought must have been laid
In wait for her there. She read every word
Of the two pages it was pressed between,
As if it was her mother speaking to her.
But forgot to put the leaf back in closing
And lost the place never to read again.
She was sure, though, there had been nothing in it.
So she looked for herself, as everyone
Looks for himself, more or less outwardly.
And her self-seeking, fitful though it was,
May still have been what led her on to read,
And think a little, and get some city schooling. She learned shorthand, whatever shorthand may Have had to do with it- she sometimes wondered. So, till she found herself in a strange place
For the name Maple to have brought her to,


Taking dictation on a paper pad
And, in the pauses when she raised her eyes, Watching out of a nineteenth story window
An airship laboring with unshiplike motion
And a vague all-disturbing roar above the river Beyond the highest city built with hands. Someone was saying in such natural tones
She almost wrote the words down on her knee, 'Do you know you remind me of a tree-
A maple tree?'
'Because my name is Maple?'
'Isn't it Mabel? I thought it was Mabel.'
'No doubt you've heard the office call me Mabel. I have to let them call me what they like.'
They were both stirred that he should have divined Without the name her personal mystery.
It made it seem as if there must be something
She must have missed herself. So they were married, And took the fancy home with them to live by.
They went on pilgrimage once to her father's
(The house one story high in front, three stories On the side it presented to the road)
To see if there was not some special tree
She might have overlooked. They could find none, Not so much as a single tree for shade,
Let alone grove of trees for sugar orchard.
She told him of the bookmark maple leaf
In the big Bible, and all she remembered
of the place marked with it—'Wave offering, Something about wave offering, it said.'
'You've never asked your father outright, have you?'
'I have, and been Put off sometime, I think.' (This was her faded memory of the way
Once long ago her father had put himself off.) 'Because no telling but it may have been Something between your father and your mother


Not meant for us at all.'
'Not meant for me?
Where would the fairness be in giving me
A name to carry for life and never know
The secret of?'
'And then it may have been
Something a father couldn't tell a daughter
As well as could a mother. And again
It may have been their one lapse into fancy 'Twould be too bad to make him sorry for
By bringing it up to him when be was too old. Your father feels us round him with our questing, And holds us off unnecessarily,
As if he didn't know what little thing
Might lead us on to a discovery.
It was as personal as be could be
About the way he saw it was with you
To say your mother, bad she lived, would be
As far again as from being born to bearing.'
'Just one look more with what you say in mind, And I give up'; which last look came to nothing. But though they now gave up the search forever, They clung to what one had seen in the other
By inspiration. It proved there was something.
They kept their thoughts away from when the maples Stood uniform in buckets, and the steam
Of sap and snow rolled off the sugarhouse.
When they made her related to the maples,
It was the tree the autumn fire ran through
And swept of leathern leaves, but left the bark Unscorched, unblackened, even, by any smoke.
They always took their holidays in autumn.
Once they came on a maple in a glade,
Standing alone with smooth arms lifted up,
And every leaf of foliage she'd worn
Laid scarlet and pale pink about her feet.
But its age kept them from considering this one. Twenty-five years ago at Maple's naming
It hardly could have been a two-leaved seedling
The next cow might have licked up out at pasture. Could it have been another maple like it?


They hovered for a moment near discovery, Figurative enough to see the symbol,
But lacking faith in anything to mean
The same at different times to different people. Perhaps a filial diffidence partly kept them From thinking it could be a thing so bridal.
And anyway it came too late for Maple. She used her hands to cover up her eyes.
'We would not see the secret if we could now: We are not looking for it any more.'
Thus had a name with meaning, given in death, Made a girl's marriage, and ruled in her life.
No matter that the meaning was not clear.
A name with meaning could bring up a child, Taking the child out of the parents' hands. Better a meaningless name, I should say,
As leaving more to nature and happy chance. Name children some names and see what you do.


Meeting And Passing
As I went down the hill along the wall
There was a gate I had leaned at for the view And had just turned from when I first saw you As you came up the hill. We met. But all
We did that day was mingle great and small Footprints in summer dust as if we drew
The figure of our being less than two
But more than one as yet. Your parasol Pointed the decimal off with one deep thrust. And all the time we talked you seemed to see Something down there to smile at in the dust. (Oh, it was without prejudice to me!) Afterward I went past what you had passed Before we met and you what I had passed.


Mending Wall
Something there is that doesn't love a wall, That sends the frozen-ground-swell under it, And spills the upper boulders in the sun; And makes gaps even two can pass abreast. The work of hunters is another thing:
I have come after them and made repair
Where they have left not one stone on a stone,
But they would have the rabbit out of hiding,
To please the yelping dogs. The gaps I mean,
No one has seen them made or heard them made, But at spring mending-time we find them there.
I let my neighbour know beyond the hill;
And on a day we meet to walk the line
And set the wall between us once again.
We keep the wall between us as we go.
To each the boulders that have fallen to each.
And some are loaves and some so nearly balls
We have to use a spell to make them balance: "Stay where you are until our backs are turned!" We wear our fingers rough with handling them.
Oh, just another kind of out-door game,
One on a side. It comes to little more:
There where it is we do not need the wall:
He is all pine and I am apple orchard.
My apple trees will never get across
And eat the cones under his pines, I tell him.
He only says, "Good fences make good neighbours." Spring is the mischief in me, and I wonder
If I could put a notion in his head:
"Why do they make good neighbours? Isn't it
Where there are cows? But here there are no cows. Before I built a wall I'd ask to know
What I was walling in or walling out,
And to whom I was like to give offence.
Something there is that doesn't love a wall,
That wants it down." I could say "Elves" to him,
But it's not elves exactly, and I'd rather
He said it for himself. I see him there
Bringing a stone grasped firmly by the top


In each hand, like an old-stone savage armed. He moves in darkness as it seems to me,
Not of woods only and the shade of trees.
He will not go behind his father's saying,
And he likes having thought of it so well
He says again, "Good fences make good neighbours."


Misgiving
All crying, 'We will go with you, O Wind!' The foliage follow him, leaf and stem;
But a sleep oppresses them as they go,
And they end by bidding them as they go, And they end by bidding him stay with them.
Since ever they flung abroad in spring
The leaves had promised themselves this flight, Who now would fain seek sheltering wall,
Or thicket, or hollow place for the night.
And now they answer his summoning blast
With an ever vaguer and vaguer stir,
Or at utmost a little reluctant whirl
That drops them no further than where they were.
I only hope that when I am free
As they are free to go in quest
Of the knowledge beyond the bounds of life It may not seem better to me to rest.


Mowing
There was never a sound beside the wood but one,
And that was my long scythe whispering to the ground. What was it it whispered? I knew not well myself;
Perhaps it was something about the heat of the sun, Something, perhaps, about the lack of sound--
And that was why it whispered and did not speak.
It was no dream of the gift of idle hours,
Or easy gold at the hand of fay or elf:
Anything more than the truth would have seemed too weak To the earnest love that laid the swale in rows,
Not without feeble-pointed spikes of flowers
(Pale orchises), and scared a bright green snake.
The fact is the sweetest dream that labour knows.
My long scythe whispered and left the hay to make.


My Butterfly
Thine emulous fond flowers are dead, too, And the daft sun-assaulter, he
That frighted thee so oft, is fled or dead: Save only me
(Nor is it sad to thee!)
Save only me
There is none left to mourn thee in the fields.
The gray grass is not dappled with the snow;
Its two banks have not shut upon the river;
But it is long ago-
It seems forever-
Since first I saw thee glance,
With all the dazzling other ones,
In airy dalliance,
Precipitate in love,
Tossed, tangled, whirled and whirled above,
Like a limp rose-wreath in a fairy dance.
When that was, the soft mist
Of my regret hung not on all the land,
And I was glad for thee,
And glad for me, I wist.
Thou didst not know, who tottered, wandering on high, That fate had made thee for the pleasure of the wind, With those great careless wings,
Nor yet did I.
And there were other things:
It seemed God let thee flutter from his gentle clasp: Then fearful he had let thee win
Too far beyond him to be gathered in,
Snatched thee, o'er eager, with ungentle grasp.
Ah! I remember me
How once conspiracy was rife
Against my life-
The languor of it and the dreaming fond;
Surging, the grasses dizzied me of thought,
The breeze three odors brought,
And a gem-flower waved in a wand!
Then when I was distraught
And could not speak,


Sidelong, full on my cheek,
What should that reckless zephyr fling But the wild touch of thy dye-dusty wing! I found that wing broken to-day!
For thou are dead, I said,
And the strange birds say.
I found it with the withered leaves
Under the eaves.


My November Guest
My Sorrow, when she's here with me, Thinks these dark days of autumn rain Are beautiful as days can be;
She loves the bare, the withered tree; She walks the sodden pasture lane.
Her pleasure will not let me stay. She talks and I am fain to list: She's glad the birds are gone away, She's glad her simple worsted grey Is silver now with clinging mist.
The desolate, deserted trees,
The faded earth, the heavy sky, The beauties she so truly sees, She thinks I have no eye for these, And vexes me for reason why.
Not yesterday I learned to know The love of bare November days Before the coming of the snow, But it were vain to tell her so, And they are better for her praise


Neither Out Far Nor In Deep
The people along the sand
All turn and look one way.
They turn their back on the land. They look at the sea all day.
As long as it takes to pass
A ship keeps raising its hull; The wetter ground like glass Reflects a standing gull
The land may vary more;
But wherever the truth may be- The water comes ashore,
And the people look at the sea.
They cannot look out far. They cannot look in deep. But when was that ever a bar To any watch they keep?


Never Again Would Bird's Song Be The Same
He would declare and could himself believe That the birds there in all the garden round From having heard the daylong voice of Eve Had added to their own an oversound,
Her tone of meaning but without the words. Admittedly an eloquence so soft
Could only have had an influence on birds When call or laughter carried it aloft.
Be that as may be, she was in their song. Moreover her voice upon their voices crossed Had now persisted in the woods so long
That probably it never would be lost.
Never again would birds' song be the same. And to do that to birds was why she came.


New Hampshire
I met a lady from the South who said
(You won't believe she said it, but she said it): 'None of my family ever worked, or had
A thing to sell.' I don't suppose the work
Much matters. You may work for all of me. I've seen the time I've had to work myself. The having anything to sell is what
Is the disgrace in man or state or nation.
I met a traveler from Arkansas
Who boasted of his state as beautiful
For diamonds and apples. 'Diamonds
And apples in commercial quantities?'
I asked him, on my guard. 'Oh, yes,' he answered, Off his. The time was evening in the Pullman.
I see the porter's made your bed,' I told him.
I met a Californian who would
Talk California—a state so blessed,
He said, in climate, none bad ever died there
A natural death, and Vigilance Committees
Had had to organize to stock the graveyards And vindicate the state's humanity.
'Just the way Stefansson runs on,' I murmured, 'About the British Arctic. That's what comes
Of being in the market with a climate.'
I met a poet from another state,
A zealot full of fluid inspiration,
Who in the name of fluid inspiration,
But in the best style of bad salesmanship, Angrily tried to male me write a protest (In verse I think) against the Volstead Act. He didn't even offer me a drink
Until I asked for one to steady him.
This is called having an idea to sell.
It never could have happened in New Hampshire.


The only person really soiled with trade
I ever stumbled on in old New Hampshire
Was someone who had just come back ashamed From selling things in California.
He'd built a noble mansard roof with balls
On turrets, like Constantinople, deep
In woods some ten miles from a railroad station, As if to put forever out of mind
The hope of being, as we say, received.
I found him standing at the close of day
Inside the threshold of his open barn,
Like a lone actor on a gloomy stage—
And recognized him, through the iron gray
In which his face was muffled to the eyes,
As an old boyhood friend, and once indeed
A drover with me on the road to Brighton.
His farm was 'grounds,' and not a farm at all;
His house among the local sheds and shanties Rose like a factor's at a trading station.
And be was rich, and I was still a rascal.
I couldn't keep from asking impolitely,
Where bad he been and what had he been doing? How did he get so? (Rich was understood.)
In dealing in 'old rags' in San Francisco.
Ob, it was terrible as well could be.
We both of us turned over in our graves.
Just specimens is all New Hampshire has, One each of everything as in a showcase, Which naturally she doesn't care to sell.
She had one President. (Pronounce him Purse, And make the most of it for better or worse.
He's your one chance to score against the state.) She had one Daniel Webster. He was all
The Daniel Webster ever was or shall be.
She had the Dartmouth' needed to produce him.
I call her old. She has one family
Whose claim is good to being settled here Before the era of colonization,
And before that of exploration even.


John Smith remarked them as be coasted by, Dangling their legs and fishing off a wharf
At the Isles of Shoals, and satisfied himself
They weren't Red Indians but veritable Pre-primitives of the white race, dawn people, Like those who furnished Adam's sons with wives; However uninnocent they may have been
In being there so early in our history.
They'd been there then a hundred years or more.
Pity he didn't ask what they were up to
At that date with a wharf already built,
And take their name. They've since told me their name— Today an honored one in Nottingham.
As for what they were up to more than fishing— Suppose they weren't behaving Puritanly,
The hour bad not yet struck for being good,
Mankind had not yet gone on the Sabbatical.
It became an explorer of the deep
Not to explore too deep in others' business.
Did you but know of him, New Hampshire has One real reformer who would change the world So it would be accepted by two classes,
Artists the minute they set up as artists, Before, that is, they are themselves accepted, And boys the minute they get out of college.
I can't help thinking those are tests to go by.
And she has one I don't know what to call him, Who comes from Philadelphia every year
With a great flock of chickens of rare breeds He wants to give the educational
Advantages of growing almost wild
Under the watchful eye of hawk and eagle Dorkings because they're spoken of by Chaucer, Sussex because they're spoken of by Herrick.
She has a touch of gold. New Hampshire gold— You may have heard of it. I had a farm
Offered me not long since up Berlin way
With a mine on it that was worked for gold; But not gold in commercial quantities,


Just enough gold to make the engagement rings And marriage rings of those who owned the farm. What gold more innocent could one have asked for? One of my children ranging after rocks
Lately brought home from Andover or Canaan
A specimen of beryl with a trace
Of radium. I know with radium
The trace would have to be the merest trace
To be below the threshold of commercial;
But trust New Hampshire not to have enough
Of radium or anything to sell.
A specimen of everything, I said.
She has one witch—old style. She lives in Colebrook. (The only other witch I ever met
Was lately at a cut-glass dinner in Boston.
There were four candles and four people present. The witch was young, and beautiful (new style), And open-minded. She was free to question
Her gift for reading letters locked in boxes.
Why was it so much greater when the boxes
Were metal than it was when they were wooden?
It made the world seem so mysterious.
The S'ciety for Psychical Research
Was cognizant. Her husband was worth millions.
I think he owned some shares in Harvard College.)
New Hampshire used to have at Salem
A company we called the White Corpuscles,
Whose duty was at any hour of night
To rush in sheets and fool's caps where they smelled A thing the least bit doubtfully perscented
And give someone the Skipper Ireson's Ride.
One each of everything as in a showcase.
More than enough land for a specimen
You'll say she has, but there there enters in Something else to protect her from herself.
There quality makes up for quantity.
Not even New Hampshire farms are much for sale. The farm I made my home on in the mountains


1 had to take by force rather than buy.
I caught the owner outdoors by himself
after winter, and I said,
&quot;I'm going to put you off this farm: I want it.' &quot;Where are you going to put me? In the road?&quot; &quot;I'm going to put you on the farm next to it.&quot; &quot;Why won't the farm next to it do for you?'
'I like this better.' It was really better.
Apples? New Hampshire has them, but unsprayed, With no suspicion in stern end or blossom end
Of vitriol or arsenate of lead,
And so not good for anything but cider.
Her unpruned grapes are flung like lariats Far up the birches out of reach of man.
A state producing precious metals, stones, And—writing; none of these except perhaps The precious literature in quantity
Or quality to worry the producer
About disposing of it. Do you know, Considering the market, there are more Poems produced than any other thing?
No wonder poets sometimes have to seem
So much more businesslike than businessmen. Their wares are so much harder to get rid of.
She's one of the two best states in the Union. Vermont's the other. And the two have been Yokefellows in the sap yoke from of old
In many Marches. And they lie like wedges, Thick end to thin end and thin end to thick end, And are a figure of the way the strong
Of mind and strong of arm should fit together, One thick where one is thin and vice versa.
New Hampshire raises the Connecticut
In a trout hatchery near Canada,
But soon divides the river with Vermont.


Both are delightful states for their absurdly
Small towns—Lost Nation, Bungey, Muddy Boo, Poplin, Still Corners (so called not because
The place is silent all day long, nor yet
Because it boasts a whisky still—because
It set out once to be a city and still
Is only corners, crossroads in a wood).
And I remember one whose name appeared Between the pictures on a movie screen
Election night once in Franconia,
When everything had gone Republican
And Democrats were sore in need of comfort: Easton goes Democratic, Wilson 4
Hughes 2. And everybody to the saddest Laughed the loud laugh the big laugh at the little. New York (five million) laughs at Manchester, Manchester (sixty or seventy thousand) laughs At Littleton (four thousand), Littleton
Laughs at Franconia (seven hundred), and Franconia laughs, I fear—-did laugh that night­- At Easton. What has Easton left to laugh at,
And like the actress exclaim 'Oh, my God' at? There's Bungey; and for Bungey there are towns, Whole townships named but without population.
Anything I can say about New Hampshire
Will serve almost as well about Vermont, Excepting that they differ in their mountains.
The Vermont mountains stretch extended straight; New Hampshire mountains Curl up in a coil.
I had been coming to New Hampshire mountains. And here I am and what am I to say?
Here first my theme becomes embarrassing. Emerson said, 'The God who made New Hampshire Taunted the lofty land with little men.'
Anotner Massachusetts poet said,
'I go no more to summer in New Hampshire.
I've given up my summer place in Dublin.'
But when I asked to know what ailed New Hampshire, She said she couldn't stand the people in it,
The little men (it's Massachusetts speaking).


And when I asked to know what ailed the people, She said, 'Go read your own books and find out.' I may as well confess myself the author
Of several books against the world in general.
To take them as against a special state Or even nation's to restrict my meaning. I'm what is called a sensibilitist,
Or otherwise an environmentalist.
I refuse to adapt myself a mite
To any change from hot to cold, from wet
To dry, from poor to rich, or back again.
I make a virtue of my suffering
From nearly everything that goes on round me. In other words, I know wherever I am,
Being the creature of literature I am,
1 sball not lack for pain to keep me awake.
Kit Marlowe taught me how to say my prayers: 'Why, this is Hell, nor am I out of it.'
Samoa, Russia, Ireland I complain of,
No less than England, France, and Italy.
Because I wrote my novels in New Hampshire
Is no proof that I aimed them at New Hampshire. When I left Massachusetts years ago
Between two days, the reason why I sought
New Hampshire, not Connecticut,
Rhode Island, New York, or Vermont was this: Where I was living then, New Hampshire offered The nearest boundary to escape across.
I hadn't an illusion in my handbag
About the people being better there
Than those I left behind. I thought they weren't. I thought they couldn't be. And yet they were. I'd sure had no such friends in Massachusetts
As Hall of Windham, Gay of Atkinson,
Bartlett of Raymond (now of Colorado),
Harris of Derry, and Lynch of Bethlehem.
The glorious bards of Massachusetts seem
To want to make New Hampshire people over. They taunt the lofty land with little men.
I don't know what to say about the people.
For art's sake one could almost wish them worse


Rather than better. How are we to write
The Russian novel in America
As long as life goes so unterribly?
There is the pinch from which our only outcry In literature to date is heard to come.
We get what little misery we can
Out of not having cause for misery.
It makes the guild of novel writers sick
To be expected to be Dostoievskis
On nothing worse than too much luck and comfort. This is not sorrow, though; it's just the vapors, And recognized as such in Russia itself
Under the new regime, and so forbidden.
If well it is with Russia, then feel free
To say so or be stood against the wall
And shot. It's Pollyanna now or death.
This, then, is the new freedom we hear tell of; And very sensible. No state can build
A literature that shall at once be sound And sad on a foundation of well-being.
To show the level of intelligence
Among us: it was just a Warren farmer
Whose horse had pulled him short up in the road
By me, a stranger. This is what he said,
From nothing but embarrassment and want
Of anything more sociable to say:
'You hear those bound dogs sing on Moosilauke? Well, they remind me of the hue and cry
We've heard against the Mid - Victorians
And never rightly understood till Bryan
Retired from politics and joined the chorus.
The matter with the Mid-Victorians
Seems to have been a man named Joh n L. Darwin.' 'Go 'long,' I said to him, he to his horse.
I knew a man who failing as a farmer
Burned down his farmhouse for the fire insurance, And spent the proceeds on a telescope
To satisfy a lifelong curiosity
About our place among the infinities.


And how was that for otherworldliness?
If I must choose which I would elevate —
The people or the already lofty mountains
I'd elevate the already lofty mountains
The only fault I find with old New Hampshire
Is that her mountains aren't quite high enough. I was not always so; I've come to be so.
How, to my sorrow, how have I attained
A height from which to look down critical
On mountains? What has given me assurance
To say what height becomes New Hampshire mountains, Or any mountains? Can it be some strength
I feel, as of an earthquake in my back,
To heave them higher to the morning star?
Can it be foreign travel in the Alps?
Or having seen and credited a moment
The solid molding of vast peaks of cloud
Behind the pitiful reality
Of Lincoln, Lafayette, and Liberty?
Or some such sense as says bow high shall jet
The fountain in proportion to the basin?
No, none of these has raised me to my throne
Of intellectual dissatisfaction,
But the sad accident of having seen
Our actual mountains given in a map
Of early times as twice the height they are—
Ten thousand feet instead of only five—
Which shows how sad an accident may be.
Five thousand is no longer high enough.
Whereas I never had a good idea
About improving people in the world,
Here I am overfertile in suggestion,
And cannot rest from planning day or night
How high I'd thrust the peaks in summer snow
To tap the upper sky and draw a flow
Of frosty night air on the vale below
Down from the stars to freeze the dew as starry.
The more the sensibilitist I am
The more I seem to want my mountains wild; The way the wiry gang-boss liked the logjam.


After he'd picked the lock and got it started, He dodged a log that lifted like an arm
Against the sky to break his back for him, Then came in dancing, skipping with his life Across the roar and chaos, and the words
We saw him say along the zigzag journey Were doubtless as the words we heard him say On coming nearer: 'Wasn't she an i-deal Son-of-a-bitch? You bet she was an i-deal.'
For all her mountains fall a little short,
Her people not quite short enough for Art, She's still New Hampshire; a most restful state.
Lately in converse with a New York alec
About the new school of the pseudo-phallic,
I found myself in a close corner where
I bad to make an almost funny choice.
'Choose you which you will be—a prude, or puke, Mewling and puking in the public arms.'
'Me for the hills where I don't have to choose.&quot; 'But if you bad to choose, which would you be?'
1 wouldn't be a prude afraid of nature.
I know a man who took a double ax
And went alone against a grove of trees;
But his heart failing him, he dropped the ax
And ran for shelter quoting Matthew Arnold: ''Nature is cruel, man is sick of blood':
There s been enough shed without shedding mine. Remember Birnam Wood! The wood's in flux!'
He had a special terror of the flux
That showed itself in dendrophobia.
The only decent tree had been to mill
And educated into boards, be said.
He knew too well for any earthly use
The line where man leaves off and nature starts. And never overstepped it save in dreams.
He stood on the safe side of the line talking— Which is sheer Matthew Arnoldism,
The cult of one who owned himself 'a foiled Circuitous wanderer,' and 'took dejectedly


His seat upon the intellectual throne'— Agreed in 'frowning on these improvised Altars the woods are full of nowadays, Again as in the days when Ahaz sinned By worship under green trees in the open. Scarcely a mile but that I come on one,
A black-checked stone and stick of rain-washed charcoal. Even to say the groves were God's first temples
Comes too near to Ahaz' sin for safety.
Nothing not built with hands of course is sacred.
But here is not a question of what's sacred;
Rather of what to face or run away from.
I'd hate to be a runaway from nature.
And neither would I choose to be a puke
Who cares not what be does in company,
And when he can't do anything, falls back
On words, and tries his worst to make words speak Louder than actions, and sometimes achieves it.
It seems a narrow choice the age insists on 8ow about being a good Greek, for instance) That course, they tell me, isn't offered this year. 'Come, but this isn't choosing—puke or prude?'
Well, if I have to choose one or the other,
I choose to be a plain New Hampshire farmer With an income in cash of, say, a thousand (From, say, a publisher in New York City).
It's restful to arrive at a decision,
And restful just to think about New Hampshire. At present I am living in Vermont.

Not To Keep
They sent him back to her. The letter came Saying... And she could have him. And before She could be sure there was no hidden ill Under the formal writing, he was in her sight, Living. They gave him back to her alive
How else? They are not known to send the dead And not disfigured visibly. His face?
His hands? She had to look, and ask,
"What was it, dear?" And she had given all
And still she had all they had they the lucky! Wasn’t she glad now? Everything seemed won, And all the rest for them permissible ease.
She had to ask, "What was it, dear?"
"Enough,"
Yet not enough. A bullet through and through, High in the breast. Nothing but what good care And medicine and rest, and you a week,
Can cure me of to go again." The same
Grim giving to do over for them both.
She dared no more than ask him with her eyes How was it with him for a second trial.
And with his eyes he asked her not to ask.
They had given him back to her, but not to keep.


Nothing Gold Can Stay
Nature's first green is gold, Her hardest hue to hold. Her early leaf's a flower; But only so an hour.
Then leaf subsides to leaf, So Eden sank to grief,
So dawn goes down to day Nothing gold can stay.


Now Close The Windows
Now close the windows and hush all the fields: If the trees must, let them silently toss;
No bird is singing now, and if there is,
Be it my loss.
It will be long ere the marshes resume,
I will be long ere the earliest bird:
So close the windows and not hear the wind, But see all wind-stirred.


October
O hushed October morning mild,
Thy leaves have ripened to the fall; Tomorrow's wind, if it be wild,
Should waste them all.
The crows above the forest call; Tomorrow they may form and go.
O hushed October morning mild,
Begin the hours of this day slow.
Make the day seem to us less brief.
Hearts not averse to being beguiled, Beguile us in the way you know.
Release one leaf at break of day;
At noon release another leaf;
One from our trees, one far away.
Retard the sun with gentle mist;
Enchant the land with amethyst.
Slow, slow!
For the grapes' sake, if the were all, Whose elaves already are burnt with frost, Whose clustered fruit must else be lost— For the grapes' sake along the all.


On a Tree Fallen Across the Road
(To hear us talk)
The tree the tempest with a crash of wood Throws down in front of us is not bar
Our passage to our journey's end for good, But just to ask us who we think we are
Insisting always on our own way so. She likes to halt us in our runner tracks, And make us get down in a foot of snow Debating what to do without an ax.
And yet she knows obstruction is in vain:
We will not be put off the final goal
We have it hidden in us to attain,
Not though we have to seize earth by the pole
And, tired of aimless circling in one place, Steer straight off after something into space.


On Looking Up By Chance At The Constellations
You'll wait a long, long time for anything much
To happen in heaven beyond the floats of cloud
And the Northern Lights that run like tingling nerves. The sun and moon get crossed, but they never touch, Nor strike out fire from each other nor crash out loud. The planets seem to interfere in their curves -
But nothing ever happens, no harm is done.
We may as well go patiently on with our life,
And look elsewhere than to stars and moon and sun For the shocks and changes we need to keep us sane. It is true the longest drout will end in rain,
The longest peace in China will end in strife.
Still it wouldn't reward the watcher to stay awake
In hopes of seeing the calm of heaven break
On his particular time and personal sight.
That calm seems certainly safe to last to-night.


Once By The Pacific
The shattered water made a misty din.
Great waves looked over others coming in, And thought of doing something to the shore That water never did to land before.
The clouds were low and hairy in the skies, Like locks blown forward in the gleam of eyes. You could not tell, and yet it looked as if
The shore was lucky in being backed by cliff, The cliff in being backed by continent;
It looked as if a night of dark intent
Was coming, and not only a night, an age. Someone had better be prepared for rage. There would be more than ocean-water broken Before God's last Put out the light was spoken.


Out, Out
The buzz-saw snarled and rattled in the yard
And made dust and dropped stove-length sticks of wood, Sweet-scented stuff when the breeze drew across it.
And from there those that lifted eyes could count
Five mountain ranges one behind the other
Under the sunset far into Vermont.
And the saw snarled and rattled, snarled and rattled,
As it ran light, or had to bear a load.
And nothing happened: day was all but done.
Call it a day, I wish they might have said
To please the boy by giving him the half hour
That a boy counts so much when saved from work.
His sister stood beside them in her apron
To tell them "Supper." At that word, the saw,
As if to prove saws knew what supper meant,
Leaped out at the boy's hand, or seemed to leap -
He must have given the hand. However it was,
Neither refused the meeting. But the hand!
The boy's first outcry was a rueful laugh,
As he swung toward them holding up the hand
Half in appeal, but half as if to keep
The life from spilling. Then the boy saw all -
Since he was old enough to know, big boy
Doing a man's work, though a child at heart -
He saw all spoiled. "Don't let him cut my hand off -
The doctor, when he comes. Don't let him, sister!"
So. But the hand was gone already.
The doctor put him in the dark of ether.
He lay and puffed his lips out with his breath.
And then - the watcher at his pulse took fright.
No one believed. They listened at his heart.
Little - less - nothing! - and that ended it.
No more to build on there. And they, since they
Were not the one dead, turned to their affairs.


Pan With Us
PAN came out of the woods one day,—
His skin and his hair and his eyes were gray, The gray of the moss of walls were they,—
And stood in the sun and looked his fill At wooded valley and wooded hill.
He stood in the zephyr, pipes in hand, On a height of naked pasture land;
In all the country he did command
He saw no smoke and he saw no roof. That was well! and he stamped a hoof.
His heart knew peace, for none came here To this lean feeding save once a year Someone to salt the half-wild steer,
Or homespun children with clicking pails Who see no little they tell no tales.
He tossed his pipes, too hard to teach
A new-world song, far out of reach,
For a sylvan sign that the blue jay’s screech
And the whimper of hawks beside the sun Were music enough for him, for one.
Times were changed from what they were: Such pipes kept less of power to stir
The fruited bough of the juniper
And the fragile bluets clustered there Than the merest aimless breath of air.
They were pipes of pagan mirth,
And the world had found new terms of worth. He laid him down on the sun-burned earth
And ravelled a flower and looked away— Play? Play? —What should he play?


Paul's Wife
To drive Paul out of any lumber camp
All that was needed was to say to him,
'How is the wife, Paul?'- and he'd disappear. Some said it was because be bad no wife,
And hated to be twitted on the subject;
Others because he'd come within a day
Or so of having one, and then been Jilted;
Others because he'd had one once, a good one, Who'd run away with someone else and left him; And others still because he had one now
He only had to be reminded of-
He was all duty to her in a minute:
He had to run right off to look her up,
As if to say, 'That's so, how is my wife?
I hope she isn't getting into mischief.'
No one was anxious to get rid of Paul.
He'd been the hero of the mountain camps
Ever since, just to show them, he bad slipped The bark of a whole tamarack off whole
As clean as boys do off a willow twig
To make a willow whistle on a Sunday
April by subsiding meadow brooks.
They seemed to ask him just to see him go,
'How is the wife, Paul?' and he always went.
He never stopped to murder anyone
Who asked the question. He just disappeared- Nobody knew in what direction,
Although it wasn't usually long
Before they beard of him in some new camp,
The same Paul at the same old feats of logging. The question everywhere was why should Paul Object to being asked a civil question-
A man you could say almost anything to
Short of a fighting word. You have the answers. And there was one more not so fair to Paul:
That Paul had married a wife not his equal.
Paul was ashamed of her. To match a hero
She would have had to be a heroine;
Instead of which she was some half-breed squaw.


But if the story Murphy told was true, She wasn't anything to be ashamed of.
You know Paul could do wonders. Everyone's Heard how he thrashed the horses on a load That wouldn't budge, until they simply stretched Their rawhide harness from the load to camp. Paul told the boss the load would be all right, 'The sun will bring your load in'- and it did-
By shrinking the rawhide to natural length. That's what is called a stretcher. But I guess The one about his jumping so's to land
With both his feet at once against the ceiling, And then land safely right side up again, Back on the floor, is fact or pretty near fact. Well, this is such a yarn. Paul sawed his wife Out of a white-pine log. Murphy was there And, as you might say, saw the lady born. Paul worked at anything in lumbering.
He'd been bard at it taking boards away
For- I forget- the last ambitious sawyer
To want to find out if he couldn't pile
The lumber on Paul till Paul begged for mercy. They'd sliced the first slab off a big butt log, And the sawyer had slammed the carriage back To slam end-on again against the saw teeth.
To judge them by the way they caught themselves When they saw what had happened to the log, They must have had a guilty expectation Something was going to go with their slambanging. Something bad left a broad black streak of grease On the new wood the whole length of the log Except, perhaps, a foot at either end.
But when Paul put his finger in the grease, It wasn't grease at all, but a long slot.
The log was hollow. They were sawing pine. 'First time I ever saw a hollow pine.
That comes of having Paul around the place. Take it to bell for me,' the sawyer said. Everyone had to have a look at it
And tell Paul what he ought to do about it. (They treated it as his.) 'You take a jackknife,


And spread the opening, and you've got a dugout All dug to go a-fishing in.' To Paul
The hollow looked too sound and clean and empty Ever to have housed birds or beasts or bees. There was no entrance for them to get in by.
It looked to him like some new kind of hollow He thought he'd better take his jackknife to. So after work that evening be came back And let enough light into it by cutting
To see if it was empty. He made out in there A slender length of pith, or was it pith?
It might have been the skin a snake had cast And left stood up on end inside the tree
The hundred years the tree must have been growing. More cutting and he bad this in both hands,
And looking from it to the pond nearby,
Paul wondered how it would respond to water.
Not a breeze stirred, but just the breath of air He made in walking slowly to the beach
Blew it once off his hands and almost broke it. He laid it at the edge, where it could drink.
At the first drink it rustled and grew limp.
At the next drink it grew invisible.
Paul dragged the shallows for it with his fingers,
And thought it must have melted. It was gone.
And then beyond the open water, dim with midges, Where the log drive lay pressed against the boom,
It slowly rose a person, rose a girl,
Her wet hair heavy on her like a helmet,
Who, leaning on a log, looked back at Paul.
And that made Paul in turn look back
To see if it was anyone behind him
That she was looking at instead of him.
(Murphy had been there watching all the time,
But from a shed where neither of them could see him.) There was a moment of suspense in birth
When the girl seemed too waterlogged to live,
Before she caught her first breath with a gasp
And laughed. Then she climbed slowly to her feet,
And walked off, talking to herself or Paul,
Across the logs like backs of alligators,
Paul taking after her around the pond.


Next evening Murphy and some other fellows Got drunk, and tracked the pair up Catamount, From the bare top of which there is a view
TO other hills across a kettle valley.
And there, well after dark, let Murphy tell it,
They saw Paul and his creature keeping house.
It was the only glimpse that anyone
Has had of Paul and her since Murphy saw them Falling in love across the twilight millpond.
More than a mile across the wilderness
They sat together halfway up a cliff
In a small niche let into it, the girl
Brightly, as if a star played on the place,
Paul darkly, like her shadow. All the light
Was from the girl herself, though, not from a star, As was apparent from what happened next.
All those great ruffians put their throats together, And let out a loud yell, and threw a bottle,
As a brute tribute of respect to beauty.
Of course the bottle fell short by a mile,
But the shout reached the girl and put her light out. She went out like a firefly, and that was all.
So there were witnesses that Paul was married And not to anyone to be ashamed of
Everyone had been wrong in judging Paul. Murphy told me Paul put on all those airs About his wife to keep her to himself.
Paul was what's called a terrible possessor. Owning a wife with him meant owning her. She wasn't anybody else's business,
Either to praise her or much as name her, And he'd thank people not to think of her. Murphy's idea was that a man like Paul Wouldn't be spoken to about a wife
In any way the world knew how to speak.

Pea Brush
I WALKED down alone Sunday after church
To the place where John has been cutting trees To see for myself about the birch
He said I could have to bush my peas.
The sun in the new-cut narrow gap
Was hot enough for the first of May,
And stifling hot with the odor of sap From stumps still bleeding their life away.
The frogs that were peeping a thousand shrill Wherever the ground was low and wet,
The minute they heard my step went still
To watch me and see what I came to get.
Birch boughs enough piled everywhere!— All fresh and sound from the recent axe. Time someone came with cart and pair And got them off the wild flower's backs.
They might be good for garden things
To curl a little finger round,
The same as you seize cat's-cradle strings, And lift themselves up off the ground.
Small good to anything growing wild,
They were crooking many a trillium
That had budded before the boughs were piled And since it was coming up had to come.


Place For A Third
Nothing to say to all those marriages!
She had made three herself to three of his.
The score was even for them, three to three.
But come to die she found she cared so much:
She thought of children in a burial row;
Three children in a burial row were sad.
One man's three women in a burial row
Somehow made her impatient with the man.
And so she said to Laban, &quot;You have done
A good deal right; don't do the last thing wrong.
Don't make me lie with those two other women.&quot;
Laban said, No, he would not make her lie With anyone but that she had a mind to,
If that was how she felt, of course, he said. She went her way. But Laban having caught This glimpse of lingering person in Eliza, And anxious to make all he could of it
With something he remembered in himself,
Tried to think how he could exceed his promise,
And give good measure to the dead, though thankless. If that was how she felt, he kept repeating.
His first thought under pressure was a grave
In a new boughten grave plot by herself,
Under he didn't care how great a stone:
He'd sell a yoke of steers to pay for it.
And weren't there special cemetery flowers,
That, once grief sets to growing, grief may rest;
The flowers will go on with grief awhile,
And no one seem neglecting or neglected?
A prudent grief will not despise such aids.
He thought of evergreen and everlasting.
And then he had a thought worth many of these. Somewhere must be the grave of the young boy
Who married her for playmate more than helpmate, And sometimes laughed at what it was between them. How would she like to sleep her last with him?
Where was his grave? Did Laban know his name?


He found the grave a town or two away,
The headstone cut with John, Beloved Husband, Beside it room reserved; the say a sister's;
A never-married sister's of that husband,
Whether Eliza would be welcome there.
The dead was bound to silence: ask the sister.
So Laban saw the sister, and, saying nothing
Of where Eliza wanted not to lie,
And who had thought to lay her with her first love, Begged simply for the grave. The sister's face
Fell all in wrinkles of responsibility.
She wanted to do right. She'd have to think.
Laban was old and poor, yet seemed to care;
And she was old and poor—but she cared, too. They sat. She cast one dull, old look at him,
Then turned him out to go on other errands
She said he might attend to in the village,
While she made up her mind how much she cared— And how much Laban cared—and why he cared, (She made shrewd eyes to see where he came in.)
She'd looked Eliza up her second time,
A widow at her second husband's grave,
And offered her a home to rest awhile
Before she went the poor man's widow's way, Housekeeping for the next man out of wedlock. She and Eliza had been friends through all.
Who was she to judge marriage in a world
Whose Bible's so confused up in marriage counsel? The sister had not come across this Laban;
A decent product of life's ironing-out;
She must not keep him waiting. Time would press Between the death day and the funeral day.
So when she saw him coming in the street
She hurried her decision to be ready
To meet him with his answer at the door.
Laban had known about what it would be
From the way she had set her poor old mouth,
To do, as she had put it, what was right.
She gave it through the screen door closed between them: &quot;No, not with John. There wouldn't be no sense.


Eliza's had too many other men.&quot;
Laban was forced to fall back on his plan
To buy Eliza a plot to lie alone in:
Which gives him for himself a choice of lots When his time comes to die and settle down.


Plowmen
A plow, they say, to plow the snow. They cannot mean to plant it, no -- Unless in bitterness to mock
At having cultivated rock.


Provide, Provide
The witch that came (the withered hag) To wash the steps with pail and rag Was once the beauty Abishag,
The picture pride of Hollywood. Too many fall from great and good For you to doubt the likelihood.
Die early and avoid the fate.
Or if predestined to die late,
Make up your mind to die in state.
Make the whole stock exchange your own! If need be occupy a throne,
Where nobody can call you crone.
Some have relied on what they knew, Others on being simply true.
What worked for them might work for you.
No memory of having starred Atones for later disregard
Or keeps the end from being hard.
Better to go down dignified
With boughten friendship at your side Than none at all. Provide, provide!


Putting In The Seed
You come to fetch me from my work to-night When supper's on the table, and we'll see
If I can leave off burying the white
Soft petals fallen from the apple tree
(Soft petals, yes, but not so barren quite,
Mingled with these, smooth bean and wrinkled pea); And go along with you ere you lose sight
Of what you came for and become like me,
Slave to a Springtime passion for the earth.
How Love burns through the Putting in the Seed
On through the watching for that early birth
When, just as the soil tarnishes with weed,
The sturdy seedling with arched body comes Shouldering its way and shedding the earth crumbs.


Quandary
Never have I been glad or sad
That there was such a thing as bad.
There had to be, I understood,
For there to have been any good.
It was by having been contrasted
That good and bad so long had lasted.
That's why discrimination reigns.
That's why we need a lot of brains
If only to discriminate
'Twixt what to love and what to hate.
To quote the oracle at Delphi,
Love thy neighbor as thyself, aye,
And hate him as thyself thou hatest.
There quandary is at its greatest.
We learned from the forbidden fruit
For brains there is no substitute.
'Unless it's sweetbreads, ' you suggest
With innuendo I detest.
You drive me to confess in ink:
Once I was fool enough to think
That brains and sweetbreads were the same, Till I was caught and put to shame,
First by a butcher, then a cook,
Then by a scientific book.
But ' twas by making sweetbreads do
I passed with such a high I.Q.


Range-Finding
The battle rent a cobweb diamond-strung And cut a flower beside a ground bird's nest Before it stained a single human breast.
The stricken flower bent double and so hung. And still the bird revisited her young.
A butterfly its fall had dispossessed
A moment sought in air his flower of rest, Then lightly stooped to it and fluttering clung.
On the bare upland pasture there had spread O'ernight 'twixt mullein stalks a wheel of thread And straining cables wet with silver dew.
A sudden passing bullet shook it dry.
The indwelling spider ran to greet the fly, But finding nothing, sullenly withdrew.


Reluctance
Out through the fields and the woods And over the walls I have wended;
I have climbed the hills of view
And looked at the world, and descended;
I have come by the highway home, And lo, it is ended.
The leaves are all dead on the ground, Save those that the oak is keeping
To ravel them one by one
And let them go scraping and creeping
Out over the crusted snow, When others are sleeping.
And the dead leaves lie huddled and still, No longer blown hither and thither;
The last lone aster is gone;
The flowers of the witch hazel wither;
The heart is still aching to seek, But the feet question ‘Whither? ’
Ah, when to the heart of man Was it ever less than a treason
To go with the drift of things,
To yield with a grace to reason,
And bow and accept the end Of a love or a season?

Revelation
We make ourselves a place apart Behind light words that tease and flout, But oh, the agitated heart
Till someone find us really out.
'Tis pity if the case require (Or so we say) that in the end We speak the literal to inspire The understanding of a friend.
But so with all, from babes that play At hide-and-seek to God afar,
So all who hide too well away
Must speak and tell us where they are.


Riders
The surest thing there is is we are riders,
And though none too successful at it, guiders, Through everything presented, land and tide And now the very air, of what we ride.
What is this talked-of mystery of birth
But being mounted bareback on the earth? We can just see the infant up astride,
His small fist buried in the bushy hide.
There is our wildest mount- a headless horse. But though it runs unbridled off its course, And all our blandishments would seem defied, We have ideas yet that we haven't tried.


Rose Pogonias
A saturated meadow, Sun-shaped and jewel-small,
A circle scarcely wider
Than the trees around were tall;
Where winds were quite excluded, And the air was stifling sweet
With the breath of many flowers, -- A temple of the heat.
There we bowed us in the burning, As the sun's right worship is,
To pick where none could miss them A thousand orchises;
For though the grass was scattered, yet every second spear
Seemed tipped with wings of color, That tinged the atmosphere.
We raised a simple prayer Before we left the spot,
That in the general mowing That place might be forgot;
Or if not all so favored, Obtain such grace of hours,
that none should mow the grass there While so confused with flowers.
Robert Frost
www.PoemHunter.com - The World's Poetry Archive 169

Sand Dunes
Sea waves are green and wet, But up from where they die, Rise others vaster yet,
And those are brown and dry.
They are the sea made land To come at the fisher town, And bury in solid sand
The men she could not drown.
She may know cove and cape, But she does not know mankind If by any change of shape,
She hopes to cut off mind.
Men left her a ship to sink:
They can leave her a hut as well; And be but more free to think For the one more cast-off shell.


Sitting by a Bush in Broad Sunlight
When I spread out my hand here today, I catch no more than a ray
To feel of between thumb and fingers; No lasting effect of it lingers.
There was one time and only the one When dust really took in the sun; And from that one intake of fire
All creatures still warmly suspire.
And if men have watched a long time And never seen sun-smitten slime Again come to life and crawl off,
We not be too ready to scoff.
God once declared he was true
And then took the veil and withdrew, And remember how final a hush Then descended of old on the bush.
God once spoke to people by name. The sun once imparted its flame. One impulse persists as our breath; The other persists as our faith.


Snow
The three stood listening to a fresh access
Of wind that caught against the house a moment, Gulped snow, and then blew free again-the Coles Dressed, but dishevelled from some hours of sleep, Meserve belittled in the great skin coat he wore.
Meserve was first to speak. He pointed backward Over his shoulder with his pipe-stem, saying, 'You can just see it glancing off the roof
Making a great scroll upward toward the sky, Long enough for recording all our names on.-
I think I'll just call up my wife and tell her
I'm here-so far-and starting on again.
I'll call her softly so that if she's wise
And gone to sleep, she needn't wake to answer.' Three times he barely stirred the bell, then listened. 'Why, Lett, still up? Lett, I'm at Cole's. I'm late.
I called you up to say Good-night from here Before I went to say Good-morning there.-
I thought I would.- I know, but, Lett-I know-
I could, but what's the sense? The rest won't be So bad.- Give me an hour for it.- Ho, ho,
Three hours to here! But that was all up hill; The rest is down.- Why no, no, not a wallow: They kept their heads and took their time to it Like darlings, both of them. They're in the barn.- My dear, I'm coming just the same. I didn't
Call you to ask you to invite me home.-'
He lingered for some word she wouldn't say, Said it at last himself, 'Good-night,' and then, Getting no answer, closed the telephone.
The three stood in the lamplight round the table With lowered eyes a moment till he said,
'I'll just see how the horses are.'
'Yes, do,'
Both the Coles said together. Mrs. Cole
Added: 'You can judge better after seeing.-
I want you here with me, Fred. Leave him here,

Brother Meserve. You know to find your way Out through the shed.'
'I guess I know my way,
I guess I know where I can find my name Carved in the shed to tell me who I am
If it don't tell me where I am. I used
To play-'
'You tend your horses and come back. Fred Cole, you're going to let him!'
'Well, aren't you?
How can you help yourself?'
'I called him Brother. Why did I call him that?'
'It's right enough.
That's all you ever heard him called round here. He seems to have lost off his Christian name.'
'Christian enough I should call that myself. He took no notice, did he? Well, at least
I didn't use it out of love of him,
The dear knows. I detest the thought of him With his ten children under ten years old.
I hate his wretched little Racker Sect,
All's ever I heard of it, which isn't much.
But that's not saying-Look, Fred Cole, it's twelve, Isn't it, now? He's been here half an hour.
He says he left the village store at nine.
Three hours to do four miles-a mile an hour
Or not much better. Why, it doesn't seem
As if a man could move that slow and move.
Try to think what he did with all that time.
And three miles more to go!'
'Don't let him go.
Stick to him, Helen. Make him answer you.
That sort of man talks straight on all his life From the last thing he said himself, stone deaf To anything anyone else may say.


I should have thought, though, you could make him hear you.'
'What is he doing out a night like this? Why can't he stay at home?'
'He had to preach.'
'It's no night to be out.'
'He may be small,
He may be good, but one thing's sure, he's tough.'
'And strong of stale tobacco.'
'He'll pull through.'
'You only say so. Not another house
Or shelter to put into from this place
To theirs. I'm going to call his wife again.'
'Wait and he may. Let's see what he will do. Let's see if he will think of her again.
But then I doubt he's thinking of himself
He doesn't look on it as anything.'
'He shan't go-there!'
'It is a night, my dear.'
'One thing: he didn't drag God into it.' 'He don't consider it a case for God.'
'You think so, do you? You don't know the kind. He's getting up a miracle this minute. Privately-to himself, right now, he's thinking He'll make a case of it if he succeeds,
But keep still if he fails.'
'Keep still all over.
He'll be dead-dead and buried.'
'Such a trouble!


Not but I've every reason not to care What happens to him if it only takes Some of the sanctimonious conceit Out of one of those pious scalawags.'
'Nonsense to that! You want to see him safe.' 'You like the runt.'
'Don't you a little?'
'Well,
I don't like what he's doing, which is what You like, and like him for.'
'Oh, yes you do.
You like your fun as well as anyone;
Only you women have to put these airs on
To impress men. You've got us so ashamed
Of being men we can't look at a good fight Between two boys and not feel bound to stop it. Let the man freeze an ear or two, I say.-
He's here. I leave him all to you. Go in
And save his life.- All right, come in, Meserve.
Sit down, sit down. How did you find the horses?'
'Fine, fine.'
'And ready for some more? My wife here Says it won't do. You've got to give it up.'
'Won't you to please me? Please! If I say please? Mr. Meserve, I'll leave it to your wife.
What did your wife say on the telephone?'
Meserve seemed to heed nothing but the lamp Or something not far from it on the table.
By straightening out and lifting a forefinger, He pointed with his hand from where it lay Like a white crumpled spider on his knee: 'That leaf there in your open book! It moved Just then, I thought. It's stood erect like that,


There on the table, ever since I came,
Trying to turn itself backward or forward,
I've had my eye on it to make out which;
If forward, then it's with a friend's impatience- You see I know-to get you on to things
It wants to see how you will take, if backward It's from regret for something you have passed And failed to see the good of. Never mind, Things must expect to come in front of us
A many times-I don't say just how many-
That varies with the things-before we see them.
One of the lies would make it out that nothing
Ever presents itself before us twice.
Where would we be at last if that were so?
Our very life depends on everything's
Recurring till we answer from within.
The thousandth time may prove the charm.- That leaf! It can't turn either way. It needs the wind's help.
But the wind didn't move it if it moved.
It moved itself. The wind's at naught in here.
It couldn't stir so sensitively poised
A thing as that. It couldn't reach the lamp
To get a puff of black smoke from the flame,
Or blow a rumple in the collie's coat.
You make a little foursquare block of air,
Quiet and light and warm, in spite of all
The illimitable dark and cold and storm,
And by so doing give these three, lamp, dog,
And book-leaf, that keep near you, their repose; Though for all anyone can tell, repose
May be the thing you haven't, yet you give it.
So false it is that what we haven't we can't give;
So false, that what we always say is true.
I'll have to turn the leaf if no one else will.
It won't lie down. Then let it stand. Who cares?'
'I shouldn't want to hurry you, Meserve,
But if you're going- Say you'll stay, you know?
But let me raise this curtain on a scene,
And show you how it's piling up against you.
You see the snow-white through the white of frost? Ask Helen how far up the sash it's climbed


Since last we read the gage.'
'It looks as if
Some pallid thing had squashed its features flat And its eyes shut with overeagerness
To see what people found so interesting
In one another, and had gone to sleep
Of its own stupid lack of understanding,
Or broken its white neck of mushroom stuff Short off, and died against the window-pane.'
'Brother Meserve, take care, you'll scare yourself More than you will us with such nightmare talk. It's you it matters to, because it's you
Who have to go out into it alone.'
'Let him talk, Helen, and perhaps he'll stay.'
'Before you drop the curtain-I'm reminded: You recollect the boy who came out here
To breathe the air one winter-had a room Down at the Averys'? Well, one sunny morning After a downy storm, he passed our place
And found me banking up the house with snow. And I was burrowing in deep for warmth,
Piling it well above the window-sills.
The snow against the window caught his eye.
'Hey, that's a pretty thought'-those were his words. 'So you can think it's six feet deep outside,
While you sit warm and read up balanced rations. You can't get too much winter in the winter.' Those were his words. And he went home and all But banked the daylight out of Avery's windows. Now you and I would go to no such length.
At the same time you can't deny it makes
It not a mite worse, sitting here, we three, Playing our fancy, to have the snowline run So high across the pane outside. There where There is a sort of tunnel in the frost
More like a tunnel than a hole-way down
At the far end of it you see a stir
And quiver like the frayed edge of the drift


Blown in the wind. I like that-I like that. Well, now I leave you, people.'
'Come, Meserve,
We thought you were deciding not to go-
The ways you found to say the praise of comfort And being where you are. You want to stay.'
'I'll own it's cold for such a fall of snow.
This house is frozen brittle, all except
This room you sit in. If you think the wind Sounds further off, it's not because it's dying; You're further under in the snow-that's all- And feel it less. Hear the soft bombs of dust It bursts against us at the chimney mouth, And at the eaves. I like it from inside
More than I shall out in it. But the horses Are rested and it's time to say good-night, And let you get to bed again. Good-night, Sorry I had to break in on your sleep.'
'Lucky for you you did. Lucky for you
You had us for a half-way station
To stop at. If you were the kind of man
Paid heed to women, you'd take my advice And for your family's sake stay where you are. But what good is my saying it over and over? You've done more than you had a right to think You could do-now. You know the risk you take In going on.'
'Our snow-storms as a rule
Aren't looked on as man-killers, and although I'd rather be the beast that sleeps the sleep Under it all, his door sealed up and lost,
Than the man fighting it to keep above it,
Yet think of the small birds at roost and not
In nests. Shall I be counted less than they are? Their bulk in water would be frozen rock
In no time out to-night. And yet to-morrow
They will come budding boughs from tree to tree Flirting their wings and saying Chickadee,

As if not knowing what you meant by the word storm.'
'But why when no one wants you to go on?
Your wife-she doesn't want you to. We don't,
And you yourself don't want to. Who else is there?'
'Save us from being cornered by a woman.
Well, there's'-She told Fred afterward that in
The pause right there, she thought the dreaded word Was coming, 'God.' But no, he only said
'Well, there's-the storm. That says I must go on. That wants me as a war might if it came.
Ask any man.'
He threw her that as something
To last her till he got outside the door.
He had Cole with him to the barn to see him off. When Cole returned he found his wife still standing Beside the table near the open book,
Not reading it.
'Well, what kind of a man Do you call that?' she said.
'He had the gift
Of words, or is it tongues, I ought to say?'
'Was ever such a man for seeing likeness?'
'Or disregarding people's civil questions-
What? We've found out in one hour more about him Than we had seeing him pass by in the road
A thousand times. If that's the way he preaches! You didn't think you'd keep him after all.
Oh, I'm not blaming you. He didn't leave you
Much say in the matter, and I'm just as glad
We're not in for a night of him. No sleep
If he had stayed. The least thing set him going.
It's quiet as an empty church without him.'
'But how much better off are we as it is? We'll have to sit here till we know he's safe.'

'Yes, I suppose you'll want to, but I shouldn't. He knows what he can do, or he wouldn't try. Get into bed I say, and get some rest.
He won't come back, and if he telephones,
It won't be for an hour or two.' 'Well then-
We can't be any help by sitting here
And living his fight through with him, I suppose.'

Cole had been telephoning in the dark.
Mrs. Cole's voice came from an inner room: 'Did she call you or you call her?'
'She me.
You'd better dress: you won't go back to bed. We must have been asleep: it's three and after.'
'Had she been ringing long? I'll get my wrapper. I want to speak to her.'
'All she said was,
He hadn't come and had he really started.'
'She knew he had, poor thing, two hours ago.' 'He had the shovel. He'll have made a fight.' 'Why did I ever let him leave this house!'
'Don't begin that. You did the best you could To keep him-though perhaps you didn't quite Conceal a wish to see him show the spunk To disobey you. Much his wife'll thank you.'
'Fred, after all I said! You shan't make out That it was any way but what it was.


Did she let on by any word she said She didn't thank me?'
'When I told her 'Gone,'
'Well then,' she said, and 'Well then'-like a threat. And then her voice came scraping slow: 'Oh, you, Why did you let him go'?'
'Asked why we let him?
You let me there. I'll ask her why she let him. She didn't dare to speak when he was here.
Their number's-twenty-one? The thing won't work. Someone's receiver's down. The handle stumbles.
The stubborn thing, the way it jars your arm!
It's theirs. She's dropped it from her hand and gone.'
'Try speaking. Say 'Hello'!' 'Hello. Hello.'
'What do you hear?'
'I hear an empty room-
You know-it sounds that way. And yes, I hear-
I think I hear a clock-and windows rattling.
No step though. If she's there she's sitting down.'
'Shout, she may hear you.' 'Shouting is no good.' 'Keep speaking then.' 'Hello. Hello. Hello.
You don't suppose-? She wouldn't go out doors?' 'I'm half afraid that's just what she might do.' 'And leave the children?'


'Wait and call again.
You can't hear whether she has left the door Wide open and the wind's blown out the lamp And the fire's died and the room's dark and cold?'
'One of two things, either she's gone to bed Or gone out doors.'
'In which case both are lost.
Do you know what she's like? Have you ever met her? It's strange she doesn't want to speak to us.'
'Fred, see if you can hear what I hear. Come.' 'A clock maybe.'
'Don't you hear something else?'
'Not talking.'
'No.'
'Why, yes, I hear-what is it?'
'What do you say it is?'
'A baby's crying!
Frantic it sounds, though muffled and far off.'
'Its mother wouldn't let it cry like that, Not if she's there.'
'What do you make of it?'
'There's only one thing possible to make,
That is, assuming-that she has gone out.
Of course she hasn't though.' They both sat down Helpless. 'There's nothing we can do till morning.'
'Fred, I shan't let you think of going out.'
'Hold on.' The double bell began to chirp. They started up. Fred took the telephone.
www.PoemHunter.com - The World's Poetry Archive 182

'Hello, Meserve. You're there, then!-And your wife?
Good! Why I asked-she didn't seem to answer. He says she went to let him in the barn.- We're glad. Oh, say no more about it, man. Drop in and see us when you're passing.'
'Well,
She has him then, though what she wants him for I don't see.'
'Possibly not for herself.
Maybe she only wants him for the children.'
'The whole to-do seems to have been for nothing. What spoiled our night was to him just his fun. What did he come in for?-To talk and visit? Thought he'd just call to tell us it was snowing.
If he thinks he is going to make our house
A halfway coffee house 'twixt town and nowhere- '
'I thought you'd feel you'd been too much concerned.' 'You think you haven't been concerned yourself.'
'If you mean he was inconsiderate
To rout us out to think for him at midnight
And then take our advice no more than nothing, Why, I agree with you. But let's forgive him. We've had a share in one night of his life. What'll you bet he ever calls again?'


Spoils Of The Dead
Two fairies it was
On a still summer day
Came forth in the woods
With the flowers to play.
The flowers they plucked
They cast on the ground
For others, and those
For still others they found. Flower-guided it was
That they came as they ran
On something that lay
In the shape of a man.
The snow must have made
The feathery bed
When this one fell
On the sleep of the dead.
But the snow was gone
A long time ago,
And the body he wore
Nigh gone with the snow.
The fairies drew near
And keenly espied
A ring on his hand
And a chain at his side.
They knelt in the leaves
And eerily played
With the glittering things,
And were not afraid.
And when they went home
To hide in their burrow,
They took them along
To play with to-morrow.
When you came on death,
Did you not come flower-guided Like the elves in the wood?
I remember that I did.
But I recognised death
With sorrow and dread,
And I hated and hate


The spoils of the dead.

Spring Pools
These pools that, though in forests, still reflect The total sky almost without defect,
And like the flowers beside them, chill and shiver, Will like the flowers beside them soon be gone, And yet not out by any brook or river,
But up by roots to bring dark foliage on.
The trees that have it in their pent-up buds
To darken nature and be summer woods -
Let them think twice before they use their powers To blot out and drink up and sweep away
These flowery waters and these watery flowers From snow that melted only yesterday.


Stars
How countlessly they congregate O'er our tumultuous snow,
Which flows in shapes as tall as trees When wintry winds do blow!--
As if with keenness for our fate, Our faltering few steps on
To white rest, and a place of rest Invisible at dawn,--
And yet with neither love nor hate, Those stars like some snow-white Minerva's snow-white marble eyes Without the gift of sight.


Stopping By Woods On A Snowy Evening
Whose woods these are I think I know. His house is in the village, though;
He will not see me stopping here
To watch his woods fill up with snow.
My little horse must think it queer To stop without a farmhouse near Between the woods and frozen lake The darkest evening of the year.
He gives his harness bells a shake To ask if there is some mistake. The only other sound's the sweep Of easy wind and downy flake.
The woods are lovely, dark and deep, But I have promises to keep,
And miles to go before I sleep,
And miles to go before I sleep.


Storm Fear
When the wind works against us in the dark, And pelts with snow
The lowest chamber window on the east, And whispers with a sort of stifled bark,
The beast,
'Come out! Come out!'-
It costs no inward struggle not to go,
Ah, no!
I count our strength,
Two and a child,
Those of us not asleep subdued to mark
How the cold creeps as the fire dies at length,- How drifts are piled,
Dooryard and road ungraded,
Till even the comforting barn grows far away And my heart owns a doubt
Whether 'tis in us to arise with day
And save ourselves unaided.

The Aim Was Song
Before man to blow to right
The wind once blew itself untaught, And did its loudest day and night In any rough place where it caught.
Man came to tell it what was wrong: It hadn't found the place to blow;
It blew too hard - the aim was song. And listen - how it ought to go!
He took a little in his mouth,
And held it long enough for north To be converted into south,
And then by measure blew it forth.
By measure. It was word and note, The wind the wind had meant to be -
A little through the lips and throat.
The aim was song - the wind could see.


The Armful
For every parcel I stoop down to seize
I lose some other off my arms and knees, And the whole pile is slipping, bottles, buns -- Extremes too hard to comprehend at once, Yet nothing I should care to leave behind. With all I have to hold with hand and mind And heart, if need be, I will do my best
To keep their building balanced at my breast. I crouch down to prevent them as they fall; Then sit down in the middle of them all.
I had to drop the armful in the road
And try to stack them in a better load.


The Axe-Helve
I've known ere now an interfering branch Of alder catch my lifted axe behind me.
But that was in the woods, to hold my hand From striking at another alder's roots,
And that was, as I say, an alder branch.
This was a man, Baptiste, who stole one day
Behind me on the snow in my own yard
Where I was working at the chopping block,
And cutting nothing not cut down already.
He caught my axe expertly on the rise,
When all my strength put forth was in his favor,
Held it a moment where it was, to calm me,
Then took it from me - and I let him take it.
I didn't know him well enough to know
What it was all about. There might be something
He had in mind to say to a bad neighbour
He might prefer to say to him disarmed.
But all he had to tell me in French-English
Was what he thought of- not me, but my axe;
Me only as I took my axe to heart.
It was the bad axe-helve some one had sold me - 'Made on machine,' he said, ploughing the grain
With a thick thumbnail to show how it ran
Across the handle's long, drawn serpentine,
Like the two strokes across a dollar sign.
'You give her 'one good crack, she's snap raght off. Den where's your hax-ead flying t'rough de hair?' Admitted; and yet, what was that to him?
'Come on my house and I put you one in
What's las' awhile - good hick'ry what's grow crooked, De second growt' I cut myself-tough, tough!'
Something to sell? That wasn't how it sounded.
'Den when you say you come? It's cost you nothing. To-naght?'
As well to-night as any night.


Beyond an over-warmth of kitchen stove
My welcome differed from no other welcome. Baptiste knew best why I was where I was.
So long as he would leave enough unsaid,
I shouldn't mind his being overjoyed
(If overjoyed he was) at having got me
Where I must judge if what he knew about an axe That not everybody else knew was to count
For nothing in the measure of a neighbour.
Hard if, though cast away for life with Yankees,
A Frenchman couldn't get his human rating.
Mrs. Baptiste came in and rocked a chair
That had as many motions as the world:
One back and forward, in and out of shadow, That got her nowhere; one more gradual, Sideways, that would have run her on the stove In time, had she not realized her danger
And caught herself up bodily, chair and all,
And set herself back where she, started from. 'She ain't spick too much Henglish- dat's too bad.' I was afraid, in brightening first on me,
Then on Baptiste, as if she understood
'What passed between us, she was only reigning. Baptiste was anxious for her; but no more
Than for himself, so placed he couldn't hope
To keep his bargain of the morning with me
In time to keep me from suspecting him
Of really never having meant to keep it.
Needlessly soon he had his axe-helves out,
A quiverful to choose from, since he wished me
To have the best he had, or had to spare -
Not for me to ask which, when what he took
Had beauties he had to point me out at length
To ensure their not being wasted on me.
He liked to have it slender as a whipstock,
Free from the least knot, equal to the strain
Of bending like a sword across the knee.
He showed me that the lines of a good helve
Were native to the grain before the knife
Expressed them, and its curves were no false curves


Put on it from without. And there its strength lay For the hard work. He chafed its long white body From end to end with his rough hand shut round it. He tried it at the eye-hold in the axe-head.
'Hahn, hahn,' he mused, 'don't need much taking down.' Baptiste knew how to make a short job long
For love of it, and yet not waste time either.
Do you know, what we talked about was knowledge? Baptiste on his defence about the children
He kept from school, or did his best to keep - Whatever school and children and our doubts
Of laid-on education had to do
With the curves of his axe-helves and his having Used these unscrupulously to bring me
To see for once the inside of his house.
Was I desired in friendship, partly as some one
To leave it to, whether the right to hold
Such doubts of education should depend
Upon the education of those who held them.
But now he brushed the shavings from his knee
And stood the axe there on its horse's hoof,
Erect, but not without its waves, as when
The snake stood up for evil in the Garden'- Top-heavy with a heaviness his short,
Thick hand made light of, steel-blue chin drawn down And in a little - a French touch in that.
Baptiste drew back and squinted at it, pleased;
'See how she's cock her head.


The Bear
The bear puts both arms around the tree above her And draws it down as if it were a lover
And its chokecherries lips to kiss good-by,
Then lets it snap back upright in the sky.
Her next step rocks a boulder on the wall
(She's making her cross-country in the fall).
Her great weight creaks the barbed wire in its staples As she flings over and off down through the maples, Leaving on one wire tooth a lock of hair.
Such is the uncaged progress of the bear.
The world has room to make a bear feel free;
The universe seems cramped to you and me.
Man acts more like the poor bear in a cage,
That all day fights a nervous inward rage,
His mood rejecting all his mind suggests.
He paces back and forth and never rests
The me-nail click and shuffle of his feet,
The telescope at one end of his beat,
And at the other end the microscope,
Two instruments of nearly equal hope,
And in conjunction giving quite a spread.
Or if he rests from scientific tread,
'Tis only to sit back and sway his head
Through ninety-odd degrees of arc, it seems, Between two metaphysical extremes.
He sits back on his fundamental butt
With lifted snout and eyes (if any) shut
(He almost looks religious but he's not),
And back and forth he sways from cheek to cheek,
At one extreme agreeing with one Greek
At the other agreeing with another Greek
Which may be thought, but only so to speak.
A baggy figure, equally pathetic
When sedentary and when peripatetic.


The Birthplace
Here further up the mountain slope Than there was every any hope,
My father built, enclosed a spring, Strung chains of wall round everything, Subdued the growth of earth to grass, And brought our various lives to pass. A dozen girls and boys we were.
The mountain seemed to like the stir,
And made of us a little while-
With always something in her smile.
Today she wouldn't know our name.
(No girl's, of course, has stayed the same.) The mountain pushed us off her knees. And now her lap is full of trees.


The Black Cottage
We chanced in passing by that afternoon
To catch it in a sort of special picture
Among tar-banded ancient cherry trees,
Set well back from the road in rank lodged grass, The little cottage we were speaking of,
A front with just a door between two windows, Fresh painted by the shower a velvet black. We paused, the minister and I, to look.
He made as if to hold it at arm's length
Or put the leaves aside that framed it in. 'Pretty,' he said. 'Come in. No one will care.' The path was a vague parting in the grass That led us to a weathered window-sill.
We pressed our faces to the pane. 'You see,' he said, 'Everything's as she left it when she died.
Her sons won't sell the house or the things in it. They say they mean to come and summer here Where they were boys. They haven't come this year. They live so far away-one is out west-
It will be hard for them to keep their word. Anyway they won't have the place disturbed.'
A buttoned hair-cloth lounge spread scrolling arms Under a crayon portrait on the wall
Done sadly from an old daguerreotype.
'That was the father as he went to war.
She always, when she talked about war,
Sooner or later came and leaned, half knelt Against the lounge beside it, though I doubt
If such unlifelike lines kept power to stir
Anything in her after all the years.
He fell at Gettysburg or Fredericksburg,
I ought to know-it makes a difference which: Fredericksburg wasn't Gettysburg, of course.
But what I'm getting to is how forsaken
A little cottage this has always seemed;
Since she went more than ever, but before-
I don't mean altogether by the lives
That had gone out of it, the father first,
Then the two sons, till she was left alone.

(Nothing could draw her after those two sons. She valued the considerate neglect
She had at some cost taught them after years.) I mean by the world's having passed it by-
As we almost got by this afternoon.
It always seems to me a sort of mark
To measure how far fifty years have brought us. Why not sit down if you are in no haste?
These doorsteps seldom have a visitor.
The warping boards pull out their own old nails With none to tread and put them in their place. She had her own idea of things, the old lady. And she liked talk. She had seen Garrison
And Whittier, and had her story of them.
One wasn't long in learning that she thought Whatever else the Civil War was for
It wasn't just to keep the States together,
Nor just to free the slaves, though it did both. She wouldn't have believed those ends enough To have given outright for them all she gave. Her giving somehow touched the principle
That all men are created free and equal.
And to hear her quaint phrases-so removed From the world's view to-day of all those things. That's a hard mystery of Jefferson's.
What did he mean? Of course the easy way
Is to decide it simply isn't true.
It may not be. I heard a fellow say so.
But never mind, the Welshman got it planted Where it will trouble us a thousand years.
Each age will have to reconsider it.
You couldn't tell her what the West was saying, And what the South to her serene belief.
She had some art of hearing and yet not Hearing the latter wisdom of the world.
White was the only race she ever knew.
Black she had scarcely seen, and yellow never. But how could they be made so very unlike
By the same hand working in the same stuff? She had supposed the war decided that.
What are you going to do with such a person? Strange how such innocence gets its own way.


I shouldn't be surprised if in this world
It were the force that would at last prevail.
Do you know but for her there was a time
When to please younger members of the church, Or rather say non-members in the church,
Whom we all have to think of nowadays,
I would have changed the Creed a very little?
Not that she ever had to ask me not to;
It never got so far as that; but the bare thought
Of her old tremulous bonnet in the pew,
And of her half asleep was too much for me.
Why, I might wake her up and startle her.
It was the words 'descended into Hades'
That seemed too pagan to our liberal youth.
You know they suffered from a general onslaught. And well, if they weren't true why keep right on Saying them like the heathen? We could drop them. Only-there was the bonnet in the pew.
Such a phrase couldn't have meant much to her. But suppose she had missed it from the Creed
As a child misses the unsaid Good-night,
And falls asleep with heartache-how should I feel? I'm just as glad she made me keep hands off,
For, dear me, why abandon a belief
Merely because it ceases to be true.
Cling to it long enough, and not a doubt
It will turn true again, for so it goes.
Most of the change we think we see in life
Is due to truths being in and out of favour.
As I sit here, and oftentimes, I wish
I could be monarch of a desert land
I could devote and dedicate forever
To the truths we keep coming back and back to.
So desert it would have to be, so walled
By mountain ranges half in summer snow,
No one would covet it or think it worth
The pains of conquering to force change on. Scattered oases where men dwelt, but mostly
Sand dunes held loosely in tamarisk
Blown over and over themselves in idleness.
Sand grains should sugar in the natal dew
The babe born to the desert, the sand storm

Retard mid-waste my cowering caravans-
'There are bees in this wall.' He struck the clapboards, Fierce heads looked out; small bodies pivoted.
We rose to go. Sunset blazed on the windows.



The Bonfire
OH, let’s go up the hill and scare ourselves,
As reckless as the best of them to-night,
By setting fire to all the brush we piled
With pitchy hands to wait for rain or snow.
Oh, let’s not wait for rain to make it safe.
The pile is ours: we dragged it bough on bough Down dark converging paths between the pines. Let’s not care what we do with it to-night. Divide it? No! But burn it as one pile
The way we piled it. And let’s be the talk
Of people brought to windows by a light
Thrown from somewhere against their wall-paper. Rouse them all, both the free and not so free With saying what they’d like to do to us
For what they’d better wait till we have done. Let’s all but bring to life this old volcano,
If that is what the mountain ever was—
And scare ourselves. Let wild fire loose we will....”
“And scare you too?” the children said together.
“Why wouldn’t it scare me to have a fire
Begin in smudge with ropy smoke and know
That still, if I repent, I may recall it,
But in a moment not: a little spurt
Of burning fatness, and then nothing but
The fire itself can put it out, and that
By burning out, and before it burns out
It will have roared first and mixed sparks with stars, And sweeping round it with a flaming sword,
Made the dim trees stand back in wider circle— Done so much and I know not how much more
I mean it shall not do if I can bind it.
Well if it doesn’t with its draft bring on
A wind to blow in earnest from some quarter,
As once it did with me upon an April.
The breezes were so spent with winter blowing
They seemed to fail the bluebirds under them
Short of the perch their languid flight was toward;


And my flame made a pinnacle to heaven
As I walked once round it in possession.
But the wind out of doors—you know the saying. There came a gust. You used to think the trees Made wind by fanning since you never knew
It blow but that you saw the trees in motion. Something or someone watching made that gust.
It put the flame tip-down and dabbed the grass
Of over-winter with the least tip-touch
Your tongue gives salt or sugar in your hand.
The place it reached to blackened instantly.
The black was all there was by day-light,
That and the merest curl of cigarette smoke—
And a flame slender as the hepaticas,
Blood-root, and violets so soon to be now.
But the black spread like black death on the ground, And I think the sky darkened with a cloud
Like winter and evening coming on together.
There were enough things to be thought of then. Where the field stretches toward the north
And setting sun to Hyla brook, I gave it
To flames without twice thinking, where it verges Upon the road, to flames too, though in fear
They might find fuel there, in withered brake,
Grass its full length, old silver golden-rod,
And alder and grape vine entanglement,
To leap the dusty deadline. For my own
I took what front there was beside. I knelt
And thrust hands in and held my face away.
Fight such a fire by rubbing not by beating.
A board is the best weapon if you have it.
I had my coat. And oh, I knew, I knew,
And said out loud, I couldn’t bide the smother
And heat so close in; but the thought of all
The woods and town on fire by me, and all
The town turned out to fight for me—that held me.
I trusted the brook barrier, but feared
The road would fail; and on that side the fire
Died not without a noise of crackling wood—
Of something more than tinder-grass and weed— That brought me to my feet to hold it back
By leaning back myself, as if the reins


Were round my neck and I was at the plough. I won! But I’m sure no one ever spread Another color over a tenth the space
That I spread coal-black over in the time
It took me. Neighbors coming home from town Couldn’t believe that so much black had come there While they had backs turned, that it hadn’t been there When they had passed an hour or so before
Going the other way and they not seen it.
They looked about for someone to have done it.
But there was no one. I was somewhere wondering Where all my weariness had gone and why
I walked so light on air in heavy shoes
In spite of a scorched Fourth-of-July feeling.
Why wouldn’t I be scared remembering that?”
“If it scares you, what will it do to us?”
“Scare you. But if you shrink from being scared, What would you say to war if it should come? That’s what for reasons I should like to know— If you can comfort me by any answer.”
“Oh, but war’s not for children—it’s for men.”
“Now we are digging almost down to China.
My dears, my dears, you thought that—we all thought it. So your mistake was ours. Haven’t you heard, though, About the ships where war has found them out
At sea, about the towns where war has come
Through opening clouds at night with droning speed Further o’erhead than all but stars and angels,—
And children in the ships and in the towns?
Haven’t you heard what we have lived to learn?
Nothing so new—something we had forgotten:
War is for everyone, for children too.
I wasn’t going to tell you and I mustn’t.
The best way is to come up hill with me
And have our fire and laugh and be afraid.”


The Code—heroics
There were three in the meadow by the brook, Gathering up windrows, piling haycocks up, With an eye always lifted toward the west, Where an irregular, sun-bordered cloud
Darkly advanced with a perpetual dagger
Flickering across its bosom. Suddenly
One helper, thrusting pitchfork in the ground, Marched himself off the field and home. One stayed. The town-bred farmer failed to understand.
What was there wrong?
Something you said just now.
What did I say?
About our taking pains.
To cock the hay?—because it's going to shower? I said that nearly half an hour ago.
I said it to myself as much as you.
You didn't know. But James is one big fool.
He thought you meant to find fault with his work. That's what the average farmer would have meant. James had to take his time to chew it over
Before he acted; he's just got round to act.
He is a fool if that's the way he takes me.
Don't let it bother you. You've found out something. The hand that knows his business won't be told
To do work faster or better—those two things.
I'm as particular as anyone:
Most likely I'd have served you just the same:
But I know you don't understand our ways.
You were just talking what was in your mind,
What was in all our minds, and you weren't hinting. Tell you a story of what happened once.
I was up here in Salem, at a man's
Named Sanders, with a gang of four or five,
Doing the haying. No one liked the boss.
He was one of the kind sports call a spider,
All wiry arms and legs that spread out wavy


From a humped body nigh as big as a biscuit. But work!—that man could work, especially If by so doing he could get more work
Out of his hired help. I'm not denying
He was hard on himself: I couldn't find
That he kept any hours—not for himself.
Day-light and lantern-light were one to him:
I've heard him pounding in the barn all night.
But what he liked was someone to encourage.
Them that he couldn't lead he'd get behind
And drive, the way you can, you know, in mowing Keep at their heels and threaten to mow their legs off. I'd seen about enough of his bulling tricks—
We call that bulling. I'd been watching him.
So when he paired off with me in the hayfield
To load the load, thinks I, look out for trouble!
I built the load and topped it off; old Sanders
Combed it down with the rake and said, 'O. K.' Everything went right till we reached the barn
With a big take to empty in a bay.
You understand that meant the easy job
For the man up on top of throwing down
The hay and rolling it off wholesale,
Where, on a mow, it would have been slow lifting.
You wouldn't think a fellow 'd need much urging Under those circumstances, would you now?
But the old fool seizes his fork in both hands,
And looking up bewhiskered out of the pit,
Shouts like an army captain, 'Let her come!'
Thinks I, d'ye mean it? 'What was that you said?'
I asked out loud so's there'd be no mistake.
'Did you say, let her come?' 'Yes, let her come.'
He said it over, but he said it softer.
Never you say a thing like that to a man,
Not if he values what he is. God, I'd as soon Murdered him as left out his middle name.
I'd built the load and knew just where to find it.
Two or three forkfuls I picked lightly round for
Like meditating, and then I just dug in
And dumped the rackful on him in ten lots.
I looked over the side once in the dust
And caught sight of him treading-water-like,


Keeping his head above. 'Damn ye,' I says, 'That gets ye!' He squeaked like a squeezed rat.
That was the last I saw or heard of him.
I cleaned the rack and drove out to cool off.
As I sat mopping the hayseed from my neck,
And sort of waiting to be asked about it,
One of the boys sings out, 'Where's the old man?' 'I left him in the barn,—under the hay.
If you want him you can go and dig him out.' They realized from the way I swobbed my neck More than was needed, something must be up. They headed for the barn I stayed where I was. They told me afterward: First they forked hay,
A lot of it, out into the barn floor.
Nothing! They listened for him. Not a rustle!
I guess they thought I'd spiked him in the temple Before I buried him, else I couldn't have managed. They excavated more. 'Go keep his wife
Out of the barn.'
Some one looked in a window;
And curse me, if he wasn't in the kitchen,
Slumped way down in a chair, with both his feet Stuck in the oven, the hottest day that summer.
He looked so mad in back, and so disgusted
There was no one that dared to stir him up
Or let him know that he was being looked at. Apparently I hadn't buried him
(I may have knocked him down), but just my trying To bury him had hurt his dignity.
He had gone to the house so's not to face me.
He kept away from us all afternoon.
We tended to his hay. We saw him out
After a while picking peas in the garden:
He couldn't keep away from doing something.
Weren't you relieved to find he wasn't dead?
No!—and yet I can't say: it's hard to tell. I went about to kill him fair enough.


You took an awkward way. Did he discharge you? Discharge me? No! He knew I did just right.

The Cow In Apple-Time
Something inspires the only cow of late
To make no more of a wall than an open gate, And think no more of wall-builders than fools.
Her face is flecked with pomace and she drools
A cider syrup. Having tasted fruit,
She scorns a pasture withering to the root.
She runs from tree to tree where lie and sweeten. The windfalls spiked with stubble and worm-eaten. She leaves them bitten when she has to fly.
She bellows on a knoll against the sky.
Her udder shrivels and the milk goes dry.


The Death Of The Hired Man
Mary sat musing on the lamp-flame at the table Waiting for Warren. When she heard his step, She ran on tip-toe down the darkened passage To meet him in the doorway with the news
And put him on his guard. "Silas is back."
She pushed him outward with her through the door And shut it after her. "Be kind," she said.
She took the market things from Warren's arms And set them on the porch, then drew him down To sit beside her on the wooden steps.
"When was I ever anything but kind to him? But I'll not have the fellow back," he said.
"I told him so last haying, didn't I?
'If he left then,' I said, 'that ended it.'
What good is he? Who else will harbour him At his age for the little he can do?
What help he is there's no depending on. Off he goes always when I need him most. 'He thinks he ought to earn a little pay, Enough at least to buy tobacco with,
So he won't have to beg and be beholden.'
'All right,' I say, 'I can't afford to pay
Any fixed wages, though I wish I could.'
'Someone else can.' 'Then someone else will have to.' I shouldn't mind his bettering himself
If that was what it was. You can be certain, When he begins like that, there's someone at him Trying to coax him off with pocket-money,--
In haying time, when any help is scarce.
In winter he comes back to us. I'm done."
"Sh! not so loud: he'll hear you," Mary said. "I want him to: he'll have to soon or late."
"He's worn out. He's asleep beside the stove. When I came up from Rowe's I found him here, Huddled against the barn-door fast asleep,


A miserable sight, and frightening, too-- You needn't smile--I didn't recognise him-- I wasn't looking for him--and he's changed. Wait till you see."
"Where did you say he'd been?"
"He didn't say. I dragged him to the house,
And gave him tea and tried to make him smoke. I tried to make him talk about his travels. Nothing would do: he just kept nodding off."
"What did he say? Did he say anything?" "But little."
"Anything? Mary, confess
He said he'd come to ditch the meadow for me."
"Warren!"
"But did he? I just want to know."
"Of course he did. What would you have him say? Surely you wouldn't grudge the poor old man Some humble way to save his self-respect.
He added, if you really care to know,
He meant to clear the upper pasture, too.
That sounds like something you have heard before? Warren, I wish you could have heard the way
He jumbled everything. I stopped to look
Two or three times--he made me feel so queer--
To see if he was talking in his sleep.
He ran on Harold Wilson--you remember--
The boy you had in haying four years since.
He's finished school, and teaching in his college. Silas declares you'll have to get him back.
He says they two will make a team for work: Between them they will lay this farm as smooth! The way he mixed that in with other things.
He thinks young Wilson a likely lad, though daft
On education--you know how they fought


All through July under the blazing sun, Silas up on the cart to build the load, Harold along beside to pitch it on."
"Yes, I took care to keep well out of earshot."
"Well, those days trouble Silas like a dream.
You wouldn't think they would. How some things linger! Harold's young college boy's assurance piqued him.
After so many years he still keeps finding
Good arguments he sees he might have used.
I sympathise. I know just how it feels
To think of the right thing to say too late.
Harold's associated in his mind with Latin.
He asked me what I thought of Harold's saying
He studied Latin like the violin
Because he liked it--that an argument!
He said he couldn't make the boy believe
He could find water with a hazel prong--
Which showed how much good school had ever done him. He wanted to go over that. But most of all
He thinks if he could have another chance
To teach him how to build a load of hay----"
"I know, that's Silas' one accomplishment. He bundles every forkful in its place,
And tags and numbers it for future reference, So he can find and easily dislodge it
In the unloading. Silas does that well.
He takes it out in bunches like big birds' nests. You never see him standing on the hay
He's trying to lift, straining to lift himself."
"He thinks if he could teach him that, he'd be Some good perhaps to someone in the world. He hates to see a boy the fool of books.
Poor Silas, so concerned for other folk,
And nothing to look backward to with pride, And nothing to look forward to with hope, So now and never any different."
Part of a moon was falling down the west,


Dragging the whole sky with it to the hills.
Its light poured softly in her lap. She saw
And spread her apron to it. She put out her hand Among the harp-like morning-glory strings,
Taut with the dew from garden bed to eaves,
As if she played unheard the tenderness
That wrought on him beside her in the night. "Warren," she said, "he has come home to die: You needn't be afraid he'll leave you this time."
"Home," he mocked gently.
"Yes, what else but home?
It all depends on what you mean by home.
Of course he's nothing to us, any more
Than was the hound that came a stranger to us Out of the woods, worn out upon the trail."
"Home is the place where, when you have to go there, They have to take you in."
"I should have called it
Something you somehow haven't to deserve."
Warren leaned out and took a step or two, Picked up a little stick, and brought it back And broke it in his hand and tossed it by. "Silas has better claim on us you think
Than on his brother? Thirteen little miles
As the road winds would bring him to his door. Silas has walked that far no doubt to-day. Why didn't he go there? His brother's rich,
A somebody--director in the bank." "He never told us that."
"We know it though."
"I think his brother ought to help, of course.
I'll see to that if there is need. He ought of right To take him in, and might be willing to--
He may be better than appearances.


But have some pity on Silas. Do you think If he'd had any pride in claiming kin
Or anything he looked for from his brother, He'd keep so still about him all this time?"
"I wonder what's between them."
"I can tell you.
Silas is what he is--we wouldn't mind him-- But just the kind that kinsfolk can't abide.
He never did a thing so very bad.
He don't know why he isn't quite as good
As anyone. He won't be made ashamed
To please his brother, worthless though he is."
"I can't think Si ever hurt anyone."
"No, but he hurt my heart the way he lay
And rolled his old head on that sharp-edged chair-back. He wouldn't let me put him on the lounge.
You must go in and see what you can do.
I made the bed up for him there to-night.
You'll be surprised at him--how much he's broken.
His working days are done; I'm sure of it."
"I'd not be in a hurry to say that."
"I haven't been. Go, look, see for yourself. But, Warren, please remember how it is: He's come to help you ditch the meadow. He has a plan. You mustn't laugh at him. He may not speak of it, and then he may. I'll sit and see if that small sailing cloud Will hit or miss the moon."
It hit the moon.
Then there were three there, making a dim row, The moon, the little silver cloud, and she.
Warren returned--too soon, it seemed to her, Slipped to her side, caught up her hand and waited.


"Warren," she questioned. "Dead," was all he answered. Robert Frost


The Demiurge's Laugh
It was far in the sameness of the wood;
I was running with joy on the Demon’s trail, Though I knew what I hunted was no true god. It was just as the light was beginning to fail That I suddenly heard—all I needed to hear:
It has lasted me many and many a year.
The sound was behind me instead of before, A sleepy sound, but mocking half,
As of one who utterly couldn’t care.
The Demon arose from his wallow to laugh, Brushing the dirt from his eye as he went; And well I knew what the Demon meant.
I shall not forget how his laugh rang out.
I felt as a fool to have been so caught,
And checked my steps to make pretence
It was something among the leaves I sought (Though doubtful whether he stayed to see). Thereafter I sat me against a tree.


The Door In The Dark
In going from room to room in the dark, I reached out blindly to save my face, But neglected, however lightly, to lace My fingers and close my arms in an arc. A slim door got in past my guard,
And hit me a blow in the head so hard
I had my native simile jarred.
So people and things don't pair any more With what they used to pair with before.

The Egg and the Machine
He gave the solid rail a hateful kick.
From far away there came an answering tick And then another tick. He knew the code:
His hate had roused an engine up the road.
He wished when he had had the track alone
He had attacked it with a club or stone
And bent some rail wide open like switch
So as to wreck the engine in the ditch.
Too late though, now, he had himself to thank. Its click was rising to a nearer clank.
Here it came breasting like a horse in skirts. (He stood well back for fear of scalding squirts.) Then for a moment all there was was size Confusion and a roar that drowned the cries
He raised against the gods in the machine. Then once again the sandbank lay serene.
The traveler's eye picked up a turtle train, between the dotted feet a streak of tail,
And followed it to where he made out vague But certain signs of buried turtle's egg;
And probing with one finger not too rough,
He found suspicious sand, and sure enough, The pocket of a little turtle mine.
If there was one egg in it there were nine, Torpedo-like, with shell of gritty leather
All packed in sand to wait the trump together. 'You'd better not disturb any more,'
He told the distance, 'I am armed for war.
The next machine that has the power to pass Will get this plasm in it goggle glass.'


The Exposed Nest
You were forever finding some new play.
So when I saw you down on hands and knees
I the meadow, busy with the new-cut hay,
Trying, I thought, to set it up on end,
I went to show you how to make it stay,
If that was your idea, against the breeze,
And, if you asked me, even help pretend
To make it root again and grow afresh.
But 'twas no make-believe with you today,
Nor was the grass itself your real concern,
Though I found your hand full of wilted fern,
Steel-bright June-grass, and blackening heads of clovers. 'Twas a nest full of young birds on the ground
The cutter-bar had just gone champing over (Miraculously without tasking flesh)
And left defenseless to the heat and light.
You wanted to restore them to their right
Of something interposed between their sight
And too much world at once--could means be found.
The way the nest-full every time we stirred
Stood up to us as to a mother-bird
Whose coming home has been too long deferred,
Made me ask would the mother-bird return
And care for them in such a change of scene
And might out meddling make her more afraid.
That was a thing we could not wait to learn.
We saw the risk we took in doing good,
But dared not spare to do the best we could
Though harm should come of it; so built the screen
You had begun, and gave them back their shade.
All this to prove we cared. Why is there then
No more to tell? We turned to other things.
I haven't any memory--have you?--
Of ever coming to the place again
To see if the birds lived the first night through,
And so at last to learn to use their wings.
Robert Frost


The Fear
A lantern light from deeper in the barn
Shone on a man and woman in the door
And threw their lurching shadows on a house
Near by, all dark in every glossy window.
A horse's hoof pawed once the hollow floor,
And the back of the gig they stood beside
Moved in a little. The man grasped a wheel,
The woman spoke out sharply, 'Whoa, stand still!'
'I saw it just as plain as a white plate,'
She said, 'as the light on the dashboard ran
Along the bushes at the roadside-a man's face.
You must have seen it too.'
'I didn't see it.
Are you sure--'
'Yes, I'm sure!'
'-it was a face?'
'Joel, I'll have to look. I can't go in,
I can't, and leave a thing like that unsettled.
Doors locked and curtains drawn will make no difference. I always have felt strange when we came home
To the dark house after so long an absence,
And the key rattled loudly into place
Seemed to warn someone to be getting out
At one door as we entered at another.
What if I'm right, and someone all the time-
Don't hold my arm!'
'I say it's someone passing.'
'You speak as if this were a travelled road.
You forget where we are. What is beyond
That he'd be going to or coming from
At such an hour of night, and on foot too.
What was he standing still for in the bushes?'
'It's not so very late-it's only dark.
There's more in it than you're inclined to say.
Did he look like--?'
'He looked like anyone.
I'll never rest to-night unless I know.
Give me the lantern.'
'You don't want the lantern.'


She pushed past him and got it for herself.
'You're not to come,' she said. 'This is my business. If the time's come to face it, I'm the one
To put it the right way. He'd never dare-
Listen! He kicked a stone. Hear that, hear that! He's coming towards us. Joel, go in-please.
Hark!-I don't hear him now. But please go in.'
'In the first place you can't make me believe it's--' 'It is-or someone else he's sent to watch.
And now's the time to have it out with him
While we know definitely where he is.
Let him get off and he'll be everywhere
Around us, looking out of trees and bushes
Till I sha'n't dare to set a foot outdoors.
And I can't stand it. Joel, let me go!'
'But it's nonsense to think he'd care enough.'
'You mean you couldn't understand his caring.
Oh, but you see he hadn't had enough-
Joel, I won't-I won't-I promise you.
We mustn't say hard things. You mustn't either.' 'I'll be the one, if anybody goes!
But you give him the advantage with this light. What couldn't he do to us standing here!
And if to see was what he wanted, why
He has seen all there was to see and gone.'
He appeared to forget to keep his hold,
But advanced with her as she crossed the grass. 'What do you want?' she cried to all the dark.
She stretched up tall to overlook the light
That hung in both hands hot against her skirt. 'There's no one; so you're wrong,' he said.
'There is.-
What do you want?' she cried, and then herself Was startled when an answer really came. 'Nothing.' It came from well along the road.
She reached a hand to Joel for support:
The smell of scorching woollen made her faint. 'What are you doing round this house at night?' 'Nothing.' A pause: there seemed no more to say. And then the voice again: 'You seem afraid.
I saw by the way you whipped up the horse.
I'll just come forward in the lantern light


And let you see.'
'Yes, do.-Joel, go back!'
She stood her ground against the noisy steps That came on, but her body rocked a little.
'You see,' the voice said.
'Oh.' She looked and looked.
'You don't see-I've a child here by the hand.' 'What's a child doing at this time of night--?'
'Out walking. Every child should have the memory Of at least one long-after-bedtime walk.
What, son?'
'Then I should think you'd try to find
Somewhere to walk--'
'The highway as it happens-
We're stopping for the fortnight down at Dean's.' 'But if that's all-Joel-you realize-
You won't think anything. You understand?
You understand that we have to be careful.
This is a very, very lonely place.
Joel!' She spoke as if she couldn't turn.
The swinging lantern lengthened to the ground,
It touched, it struck it, clattered and went out.


The Flood
Blood has been harder to dam back than water. Just when we think we have it impounded safe Behind new barrier walls (and let it chafe!),
It breaks away in some new kind of slaughter. We choose to say it is let loose by the devil; But power of blood itself releases blood.
It goes by might of being such a flood
Held high at so unnatural a level.
It will have outlet, brave and not so brave. weapons of war and implements of peace
Are but the points at which it finds release.
And now it is once more the tidal wave
That when it has swept by leaves summits stained. Oh, blood will out. It cannot be contained.


The Flower Boat
The fisherman's swapping a yarn for a yarn Under the hand of the village barber,
And her in the angle of house and barn
His deep-sea dory has found a harbor.
At anchor she rides the sunny sod
As full to the gunnel of flowers growing
As ever she turned her home with cod
From George's bank when winds were blowing.
And I judge from that elysian freight That all they ask is rougher weather, And dory and master will sail by fate To seek the Happy Isles together.


The Freedom Of The Moon
I've tried the new moon tilted in the air Above a hazy tree-and-farmhouse cluster As you might try a jewel in your hair.
I've tried it fine with little breadth of luster, Alone, or in one ornament combining
With one first-water start almost shining.
I put it shining anywhere I please.
By walking slowly on some evening later,
I've pulled it from a crate of crooked trees, And brought it over glossy water, greater, And dropped it in, and seen the image wallow, The color run, all sorts of wonder follow.


The Generations of Men
A governor it was proclaimed this time,
When all who would come seeking in New Hampshire Ancestral memories might come together.
And those of the name Stark gathered in Bow,
A rock-strewn town where farming has fallen off,
And sprout-lands flourish where the axe has gone. Someone had literally run to earth
In an old cellar hole in a by-road
The origin of all the family there.
Thence they were sprung, so numerous a tribe
That now not all the houses left in town
Made shift to shelter them without the help
Of here and there a tent in grove and orchard.
They were at Bow, but that was not enough:
Nothing would do but they must fix a day
To stand together on the crater's verge
That turned them on the world, and try to fathom
The past and get some strangeness out of it.
But rain spoiled all. The day began uncertain,
With clouds low trailing and moments of rain that misted. The young folk held some hope out to each other
Till well toward noon when the storm settled down
With a swish in the grass. 'What if the others
Are there,' they said. 'It isn't going to rain.'
Only one from a farm not far away
Strolled thither, not expecting he would find
Anyone else, but out of idleness.
One, and one other, yes, for there were two.
The second round the curving hillside road
Was a girl; and she halted some way off
To reconnoitre, and then made up her mind
At least to pass by and see who he was,
And perhaps hear some word about the weather.
This was some Stark she didn't know. He nodded.
'No fête to-day,' he said.
'It looks that way.'
She swept the heavens, turning on her heel.
'I only idled down.'
'I idled down.'


Provision there had been for just such meeting Of stranger cousins, in a family tree
Drawn on a sort of passport with the branch Of the one bearing it done in detail-
Some zealous one's laborious device.
She made a sudden movement toward her bodice, As one who clasps her heart. They laughed together. 'Stark?' he inquired. 'No matter for the proof.'
'Yes, Stark. And you?'
'I'm Stark.' He drew his passport.
'You know we might not be and still be cousins:
The town is full of Chases, Lowes, and Baileys,
All claiming some priority in Starkness.
My mother was a Lane, yet might have married Anyone upon earth and still her children
Would have been Starks, and doubtless here to-day.' 'You riddle with your genealogy
Like a Viola. I don't follow you.'
'I only mean my mother was a Stark
Several times over, and by marrying father
No more than brought us back into the name.'
'One ought not to be thrown into confusion
By a plain statement of relationship,
But I own what you say makes my head spin.
You take my card- you seem so good at such things- And see if you can reckon our cousinship.
Why not take seats here on the cellar wall
And dangle feet among the raspberry vines?'
'Under the shelter of the family tree.'
'Just so- that ought to be enough protection.'
'Not from the rain. I think it's going to rain.'
'It's raining.'
'No, it's misting; let's be fair.
Does the rain seem to you to cool the eyes?'
The situation was like this: the road
Bowed outward on the mountain half-way up,
And disappeared and ended not far off.
No one went home that way. The only house
Beyond where they were was a shattered seedpod. And below roared a brook hidden in trees,
The sound of which was silence for the place.
This he sat listening to till she gave judgment.


'On father's side, it seems, we're- let me see- - '
'Don't be too technical.- You have three cards.'
'Four cards, one yours, three mine, one for each branch Of the Stark family I'm a member of.'
'D'you know a person so related to herself
Is supposed to be mad.'
'I may be mad.'
'You look so, sitting out here in the rain
Studying genealogy with me
You never saw before. What will we come to
With all this pride of ancestry, we Yankees?
I think we're all mad. Tell me why we're here
Drawn into town about this cellar hole
Like wild geese on a lake before a storm?
What do we see in such a hole, I wonder.'
'The Indians had a myth of Chicamoztoc,
Which means The Seven Caves that We Came out of. This is the pit from which we Starks were digged.'
'You must be learned. That's what you see in it?'
'And what do you see?'
'Yes, what do I see?
First let me look. I see raspberry vines- - '
'Oh, if you're going to use your eyes, just hear
What I see. It's a little, little boy,
As pale and dim as a match flame in the sun;
He's groping in the cellar after jam,
He thinks it's dark and it's flooded with daylight.'
'He's nothing. Listen. When I lean like this
I can make out old Grandsir Stark distinctly,-
With his pipe in his mouth and his brown jug-
Bless you, it isn't Grandsir Stark, it's Granny,
But the pipe's there and smoking and the jug.
She's after cider, the old girl, she's thirsty;
Here's hoping she gets her drink and gets out safely.' 'Tell me about her. Does she look like me?'
'She should, shouldn't she, you're so many times
Over descended from her. I believe
She does look like you. Stay the way you are.
The nose is just the same, and so's the chin-
Making allowance, making due allowance.'
'You poor, dear, great, great, great, great Granny!' 'See that you get her greatness right. Don't stint her.'


'Yes, it's important, though you think it isn't.
I won't be teased. But see how wet I am.' 'Yes, you must go; we can't stay here for ever. But wait until I give you a hand up.
A bead of silver water more or less
Strung on your hair won't hurt your summer looks. I wanted to try something with the noise
That the brook raises in the empty valley.
We have seen visions- now consult the voices. Something I must have learned riding in trains When I was young. I used the roar
To set the voices speaking out of it,
Speaking or singing, and the band-music playing. Perhaps you have the art of what I mean.
I've never listened in among the sounds
That a brook makes in such a wild descent.
It ought to give a purer oracle.'
'It's as you throw a picture on a screen:
The meaning of it all is out of you;
The voices give you what you wish to hear.' 'Strangely, it's anything they wish to give.'
'Then I don't know. It must be strange enough.
I wonder if it's not your make-believe.
What do you think you're like to hear to-day?' 'From the sense of our having been together-
But why take time for what I'm like to hear?
I'll tell you what the voices really say.
You will do very well right where you are
A little longer. I mustn't feel too hurried,
Or I can't give myself to hear the voices.'
'Is this some trance you are withdrawing into?' 'You must be very still; you mustn't talk.'
'I'll hardly breathe.'
'The voices seem to say- - '
'I'm waiting.'
'Don't! The voices seem to say:
Call her Nausicaa, the unafraid
Of an acquaintance made adventurously.'
'I let you say that- on consideration.'
'I don't see very well how you can help it.
You want the truth. I speak but by the voices.
You see they know I haven't had your name,


Though what a name should matter between us- - ' 'I shall suspect- - '
'Be good. The voices say:
Call her Nausicaa, and take a timber
That you shall find lies in the cellar charred Among the raspberries, and hew and shape it For a door-sill or other corner piece
In a new cottage on the ancient spot.
The life is not yet all gone out of it.
And come and make your summer dwelling here, And perhaps she will come, still unafraid,
And sit before you in the open door
With flowers in her lap until they fade,
But not come in across the sacred sill- - '
'I wonder where your oracle is tending.
You can see that there's something wrong with it, Or it would speak in dialect. Whose voice
Does it purport to speak in? Not old Grandsir's
Nor Granny's, surely. Call up one of them.
They have best right to be heard in this place.'
'You seem so partial to our great-grandmother (Nine times removed. Correct me if I err.)
You will be likely to regard as sacred
Anything she may say. But let me warn you,
Folks in her day were given to plain speaking.
You think you'd best tempt her at such a time?'
'It rests with us always to cut her off.'
'Well then, it's Granny speaking: 'I dunnow!
Mebbe I'm wrong to take it as I do.
There ain't no names quite like the old ones though, Nor never will be to my way of thinking.
One mustn't bear too hard on the new comers,
But there's a dite too many of them for comfort.
I should feel easier if I could see
More of the salt wherewith they're to be salted. Son, you do as you're told! You take the timber-
It's as sound as the day when it was cut-
And begin over- - ' There, she'd better stop.
You can see what is troubling Granny, though.
But don't you think we sometimes make too much Of the old stock? What counts is the ideals,
And those will bear some keeping still about.'


'I can see we are going to be good friends.' 'I like your 'going to be.' You said just now It's going to rain.'
'I know, and it was raining.
I let you say all that. But I must go now.' 'You let me say it? on consideration?
How shall we say good-bye in such a case?' 'How shall we?'
'Will you leave the way to me?'
'No, I don't trust your eyes. You've said enough. Now give me your hand up.- Pick me that flower.' 'Where shall we meet again?'
'Nowhere but here
Once more before we meet elsewhere.'
'In rain?'
'It ought to be in rain. Sometime in rain.
In rain to-morrow, shall we, if it rains?
But if we must, in sunshine.' So she went.


The Gift Outright
The land was ours before we were the land's. She was our land more than a hundred years Before we were her people. She was ours
In Massachusetts, in Virginia,
But we were England's, still colonials, Possessing what we still were unpossessed by, Possessed by what we now no more possessed. Something we were withholding made us weak Until we found out that it was ourselves
We were withholding from our land of living, And forthwith found salvation in surrender. Such as we were we gave ourselves outright (The deed of gift was many deeds of war)
To the land vaguely realizing westward,
But still unstoried, artless, unenhanced,
Such as she was, such as she would become.


The Gum-Gatherer
There overtook me and drew me in
To his down-hill, early-morning stride,
And set me five miles on my road
Better than if he had had me ride,
A man with a swinging bag for'load
And half the bag wound round his hand.
We talked like barking above the din
Of water we walked along beside.
And for my telling him where I'd been
And where I lived in mountain land
To be coming home the way I was,
He told me a little about himself.
He came from higher up in the pass
Where the grist of the new-beginning brooks Is blocks split off the mountain mass --
And hop. eless grist enough it looks
Ever to grind to soil for grass.
(The way it is will do for moss.)
There he had built his stolen shack.
It had to be a stolen shack
Because of the fears of fire and logs
That trouble the sleep of lumber folk: Visions of half the world burned black
And the sun shrunken yellow in smoke.
We know who when they come to town Bring berries under the wagon seat,
Or a basket of eggs between their feet; What this man brought in a cotton sack
Was gum, the gum of the mountain spruce. He showed me lumps of the scented stuff Like uncut jewels, dull and rough
It comes to market golden brown;
But turns to pink between the teeth.
I told him this is a pleasant life
To set your breast to the bark of trees
That all your days are dim beneath,
And reaching up with a little knife,
To loose the resin and take it down
And bring it to market when you please


The Hill Wife
It was too lonely for her there,
And too wild,
And since there were but two of them, And no child.
And work was little in the house,
She was free,
And followed where he furrowed field, Or felled log.
She rested on a log and tossed The fresh chips,
With a song only to herself
On her lips.
And once she went to break a bough Of black alder.
She strayed so far she scarcely heard When he called her -
And didn't answer - didn't speak - Or return.
She stood, and then she ran and hid In the fern.
He never found her, though he looked Everywhere,
And he asked at her mother's house Was she there.
Sudden and swift and light as that The ties gave,
And he learned of finalities Besides the grave.


The Housekeeper
I let myself in at the kitchen door.
'It's you,' she said. 'I can't get up. Forgive me
Not answering your knock. I can no more
Let people in than I can keep them out.
I'm getting too old for my size, I tell them.
My fingers are about all I've the use of
So's to take any comfort. I can sew:
I help out with this beadwork what I can.'
'That's a smart pair of pumps you're beading there.
Who are they for?'
'You mean?- oh, for some miss.
I can't keep track of other people's daughters.
Lord, if I were to dream of everyone
Whose shoes I primped to dance in!'
'And where's John?'
'Haven't you seen him? Strange what set you off
To come to his house when he's gone to yours.
You can't have passed each other. I know what:
He must have changed his mind and gone to Garlands. He won't be long in that case. You can wait.
Though what good you can be, or anyone-
It's gone so far. You've heard? Estelle's run off.'
'Yes, what's it all about? When did she go?'
'Two weeks since.'
'She's in earnest, it appears.'
'I'm sure she won't come back. She's hiding somewhere. I don't know where myself. John thinks I do.
He thinks I only have to say the word,
And she'll come back. But, bless you, I'm her mother-
I can't talk to her, and, Lord, if I could!'
'It will go hard with John. What will he do?
He can't find anyone to take her place.'
'Oh, if you ask me that, what will he do?
He gets some sort of bakeshop meals together,
With me to sit and tell him everything,
What's wanted and how much and where it is.
But when I'm gone- of course I can't stay here:
Estelle's to take me when she's settled down.
He and I only hinder one another.


I tell them they can't get me through the door, though: I've been built in here like a big church organ.
We've been here fifteen years.'
'That's a long time
To live together and then pull apart.
How do you see him living when you're gone?
Two of you out will leave an empty house.'
'I don't just see him living many years,
Left here with nothing but the furniture.
I hate to think of the old place when we're gone, With the brook going by below the yard,
And no one here but hens blowing about.
If he could sell the place, but then, he can't:
No one will ever live on it again.
It's too run down. This is the last of it.
What I think he will do, is let things smash.
He'll sort of swear the time away. He's awful!
I never saw a man let family troubles
Make so much difference in his man's affairs.
He's just dropped everything. He's like a child.
I blame his being brought up by his mother.
He's got hay down that's been rained on three times. He hoed a little yesterday for me:
I thought the growing things would do him good. Something went wrong. I saw him throw the hoe Sky-high with both hands. I can see it now-
Come here- I'll show you- in that apple tree.
That's no way for a man to do at his age:
He's fifty-five, you know, if he's a day.'
'Aren't you afraid of him? What's that gun for?'
'Oh, that's been there for hawks since chicken-time. John Hall touch me! Not if he knows his friends.
I'll say that for him, John's no threatener
Like some men folk. No one's afraid of him;
All is, he's made up his mind not to stand
What he has got to stand.'
'Where is Estelle?
Couldn't one talk to her? What does she say?
You say you don't know where she is.'
'Nor want to!
She thinks if it was bad to live with him,
It must be right to leave him.'


'Which is wrong!'
'Yes, but he should have married her.'
'I know.'
'The strain's been too much for her all these years:
I can't explain it any other way.
It's different with a man, at least with John:
He knows he's kinder than the run of men.
Better than married ought to be as good
As married- that's what he has always said.
I know the way he's felt- but all the same!'
'I wonder why he doesn't marry her
And end it.'
'Too late now: she wouldn't have him.
He's given her time to think of something else.
That's his mistake. The dear knows my interest
Has been to keep the thing from breaking up.
This is a good home: I don't ask for better.
But when I've said, 'Why shouldn't they be married,' He'd say, 'Why should they?' no more words than that.' 'And after all why should they? John's been fair
I take it. What was his was always hers.
There was no quarrel about property.'
'Reason enough, there was no property.
A friend or two as good as own the farm,
Such as it is. It isn't worth the mortgage.'
'I mean Estelle has always held the purse.'
'The rights of that are harder to get at.
I guess Estelle and I have filled the purse.
'Twas we let him have money, not he us.
John's a bad farmer. I'm not blaming him.
Take it year in, year out, he doesn't make much.
We came here for a home for me, you know,
Estelle to do the housework for the board
Of both of us. But look how it turns out:
She seems to have the housework, and besides,
Half of the outdoor work, though as for that,
He'd say she does it more because she likes it.
You see our pretty things are all outdoors.
Our hens and cows and pigs are always better
Than folks like us have any business with.
Farmers around twice as well off as we
Haven't as good. They don't go with the farm.


One thing you can't help liking about John,
He's fond of nice things- too fond, some would say. But Estelle don't complain: she's like him there. She wants our hens to be the best there are.
You never saw this room before a show,
Full of lank, shivery, half-drowned birds
In separate coops, having their plumage done.
The smell of the wet feathers in the heat!
You spoke of John's not being safe to stay with. You don't know what a gentle lot we are:
We wouldn't hurt a hen! You ought to see us Moving a flock of hens from place to place.
We're not allowed to take them upside down,
All we can hold together by the legs.
Two at a time's the rule, one on each arm,
No matter how far and how many times
We have to go.'
'You mean that's John's idea.'
'And we live up to it; or I don't know
What childishness he wouldn't give way to.
He manages to keep the upper hand
On his own farm. He's boss. But as to hens:
We fence our flowers in and the hens range. Nothing's too good for them. We say it pays.
John likes to tell the offers he has had,
Twenty for this cock, twenty-five for that.
He never takes the money. If they're worth
That much to sell, they're worth as much to keep. Bless you, it's all expense, though. Reach me down The little tin box on the cupboard shelf,
The upper shelf, the tin box. That's the one.
I'll show you. Here you are.'
'What's this?'
'A bill-
For fifty dollars for one Langshang cock-
Receipted. And the cock is in the yard.'
'Not in a glass case, then?'
'He'd need a tall one:
He can eat off a barrel from the ground.
He's been in a glass case, as you may say,
The Crystal Palace, London. He's imported.
John bought him, and we paid the bill with beads-


Wampum, I call it. Mind, we don't complain. But you see, don't you, we take care of him.' 'And like it, too. It makes it all the worse.'
'It seems as if. And that's not all: he's helpless In ways that I can hardly tell you of. Sometimes he gets possessed to keep accounts To see where all the money goes so fast.
You know how men will be ridiculous.
But it's just fun the way he gets bedeviled-
If he's untidy now, what will he be- - ?
'It makes it all the worse. You must be blind.' 'Estelle's the one. You needn't talk to me.'
'Can't you and I get to the root of it?
What's the real trouble? What will satisfy her?'
'It's as I say: she's turned from him, that's all.'
'But why, when she's well off? Is it the neighbours, Being cut off from friends?'
'We have our friends.
That isn't it. Folks aren't afraid of us.'
'She's let it worry her. You stood the strain,
And you're her mother.'
'But I didn't always.
I didn't relish it along at first.
But I got wonted to it. And besides-
John said I was too old to have grandchildren.
But what's the use of talking when it's done?
She won't come back- it's worse than that- she can't.' 'Why do you speak like that? What do you know? What do you mean?- she's done harm to herself?'
'I mean she's married- married someone else.'
'Oho, oho!'
'You don't believe me.'
'Yes, I do,
Only too well. I knew there must be something!
So that was what was back. She's bad, that's all!' 'Bad to get married when she had the chance?' 'Nonsense! See what's she done! But who, who- - ' 'Who'd marry her straight out of such a mess?
Say it right out- no matter for her mother.
The man was found. I'd better name no names.
John himself won't imagine who he is.'
'Then it's all up. I think I'll get away.


You'll be expecting John. I pity Estelle;
I suppose she deserves some pity, too.
You ought to have the kitchen to yourself
To break it to him. You may have the job.'
'You needn't think you're going to get away.
John's almost here. I've had my eye on someone Coming down Ryan's Hill. I thought 'twas him. Here he is now. This box! Put it away.
And this bill.'
'What's the hurry? He'll unhitch.'
'No, he won't, either. He'll just drop the reins
And turn Doll out to pasture, rig and all.
She won't get far before the wheels hang up
On something- there's no harm. See, there he is! My, but he looks as if he must have heard!'
John threw the door wide but he didn't enter.
'How are you, neighbour? Just the man I'm after. Isn't it Hell,' he said. 'I want to know.
Come out here if you want to hear me talk.
I'll talk to you, old woman, afterward.
I've got some news that maybe isn't news.
What are they trying to do to me, these two?'
'Do go along with him and stop his shouting.'
She raised her voice against the closing door: 'Who wants to hear your news, you- dreadful fool?'

The Impulse
It was too lonely for her there,
And too wild,
And since there were but two of them, And no child,
And work was little in the house,
She was free,
And followed where he furrowed field, Or felled tree.
She rested on a log and tossed The fresh chips,
With a song only to herself
On her lips.
And once she went to break a bough Of black alder.
She strayed so far she scarcely heard When he called her-
And didn't answer-didn't speak-
Or return.
She stood, and then she ran and hid In the fern.
He never found her, though he looked Everywhere,
And he asked at her mother's house Was she there.
Sudden and swift and light as that The ties gave,
And he learned of finalities Besides the grave.


The Investment
Over back where they speak of life as staying ('You couldn't call it living, for it ain't'),
There was an old, old house renewed with paint, And in it a piano loudly playing.
Out in the plowed ground in the cold a digger, Among unearthed potatoes standing still,
Was counting winter dinners, one a hill,
With half an ear to the piano's vigor.
All that piano and new paint back there,
Was it some money suddenly come into?
Or some extravagance young love had been to? Or old love on an impulse not to care-
Not to sink under being man and wife, But get some color and music out of life?


The Kitchen Chimney
Builder, in building the little house,
In every way you may please yourself;
But please please me in the kitchen chimney: Don't build me a chimney upon a shelf.
However far you must go for bricks, Whatever they cost a-piece or a pound,
But me enough for a full-length chimney, And build the chimney clear from the ground.
It's not that I'm greatly afraid of fire,
But I never heard of a house that throve (And I know of one that didn't thrive) Where the chimney started above the stove.
And I dread the ominous stain of tar
That there always is on the papered walls, And the smell of fire drowned in rain
That there always is when the chimney's false.
A shelf's for a clock or vase or picture,
But I don't see why it should have to bear
A chimney that only would serve to remind me Of castles I used to build in air.


The Last Mowing
There's a place called Far-away Meadow We never shall mow in again,
Or such is the talk at the farmhouse: The meadow is finished with men.
Then now is the chance for the flowers That can't stand mowers and plowers. It must be now, through, in season Before the not mowing brings trees on, Before trees, seeing the opening, March into a shadowy claim.
The trees are all I'm afraid of,
That flowers can't bloom in the shade of; It's no more men I'm afraid of;
The meadow is done with the tame.
The place for the moment is ours
For you, oh tumultuous flowers,
To go to waste and go wild in,
All shapes and colors of flowers,
I needn't call you by name.

The Last Word of a Blue Bird
As told to a child
As I went out a Crow
In a low voice said, 'Oh,
I was looking for you.
How do you do?
I just came to tell you
To tell Lesley (will you?)
That her little Bluebird
Wanted me to bring word
That the north wind last night That made the stars bright And made ice on the trough Almost made him cough
His tail feathers off.
He just had to fly!
But he sent her Good-by,
And said to be good,
And wear her red hood,
And look for the skunk tracks In the snow with an ax-
And do everything!
And perhaps in the spring
He would come back and sing.'


The Line-Gang
Here come the line-gang pioneering by,
They throw a forest down less cut than broken. They plant dead trees for living, and the dead They string together with a living thread.
They string an instrument against the sky Wherein words whether beaten out or spoken Will run as hushed as when they were a thought But in no hush they string it: they go past
With shouts afar to pull the cable taught,
To hold it hard until they make it fast,
To ease away -- they have it. With a laugh,
An oath of towns that set the wild at naught They bring the telephone and telegraph.


The Lockless Door
It went many years,
But at last came a knock, And I thought of the door With no lock to lock.
I blew out the light,
I tip-toed the floor, And raised both hands In prayer to the door.
But the knock came again My window was wide;
I climbed on the sill
And descended outside.
Back over the sill
I bade a "Come in"
To whoever the knock
At the door may have been.
So at a knock
I emptied my cage To hide in the world And alter with age.


The Master Speed
No speed of wind or water rushing by
But you have speed far greater. You can climb Back up a stream of radiance to the sky,
And back through history up the stream of time. And you were given this swiftness, not for haste Nor chiefly that you may go where you will,
But in the rush of everything to waste,
That you may have the power of standing still- Off any still or moving thing you say.
Two such as you with such a master speed Cannot be parted nor be swept away
From one another once you are agreed
That life is only life forevermore
Together wing to wing and oar to oar

The Most Of It
He thought he kept the universe alone;
For all the voice in answer he could wake
Was but the mocking echo of his own
From some tree-hidden cliff across the lake. Some morning from the boulder-broken beach He would cry out on life, that what it wants
Is not its own love back in copy speech, But counter-love, original response.
And nothing ever came of what he cried Unless it was the embodiment that crashed In the cliff's talus on the other side,
And then in the far distant water splashed, But after a time allowed for it to swim, Instead of proving human when it neared And someone else additional to him,
As a great buck it powerfully appeared,
Pushing the crumpled water up ahead,
And landed pouring like a waterfall,
And stumbled through the rocks with horny tread, And forced the underbrush—and that was all.



The Mountain
The mountain held the town as in a shadow I saw so much before I slept there once:
I noticed that I missed stars in the west, Where its black body cut into the sky.
Near me it seemed: I felt it like a wall
Behind which I was sheltered from a wind.
And yet between the town and it I found,
When I walked forth at dawn to see new things, Were fields, a river, and beyond, more fields.
The river at the time was fallen away,
And made a widespread brawl on cobble-stones; But the signs showed what it had done in spring; Good grass-land gullied out, and in the grass Ridges of sand, and driftwood stripped of bark.
I crossed the river and swung round the mountain. And there I met a man who moved so slow
With white-faced oxen in a heavy cart,
It seemed no hand to stop him altogether.
'What town is this?' I asked.
'This? Lunenburg.'
Then I was wrong: the town of my sojourn, Beyond the bridge, was not that of the mountain, But only felt at night its shadowy presence. 'Where is your village? Very far from here?'
'There is no village-only scattered farms.
We were but sixty voters last election.
We can't in nature grow to many more:
That thing takes all the room!' He moved his goad. The mountain stood there to be pointed at. Pasture ran up the side a little way,
And then there was a wall of trees with trunks: After that only tops of trees, and cliffs
Imperfectly concealed among the leaves.
A dry ravine emerged from under boughs
Into the pasture.
'That looks like a path.
Is that the way to reach the top from here?-
Not for this morning, but some other time:
I must be getting back to breakfast now.'


'I don't advise your trying from this side.
There is no proper path, but those that have
Been up, I understand, have climbed from Ladd's. That's five miles back. You can't mistake the place: They logged it there last winter some way up.
I'd take you, but I'm bound the other way.'
'You've never climbed it?'
'I've been on the sides
Deer-hunting and trout-fishing. There's a brook That starts up on it somewhere-I've heard say Right on the top, tip-top-a curious thing.
But what would interest you about the brook,
It's always cold in summer, warm in winter.
One of the great sights going is to see
It steam in winter like an ox's breath,
Until the bushes all along its banks
Are inch-deep with the frosty spines and bristles- You know the kind. Then let the sun shine on it!' 'There ought to be a view around the world
From such a mountain-if it isn't wooded
Clear to the top.' I saw through leafy screens Great granite terraces in sun and shadow,
Shelves one could rest a knee on getting up-
With depths behind him sheer a hundred feet;
Or turn and sit on and look out and down,
With little ferns in crevices at his elbow.
'As to that I can't say. But there's the spring,
Right on the summit, almost like a fountain.
That ought to be worth seeing.'
'If it's there.
You never saw it?'
'I guess there's no doubt
About its being there. I never saw it.
It may not be right on the very top:
It wouldn't have to be a long way down
To have some head of water from above,
And a good distance down might not be noticed
By anyone who'd come a long way up.
One time I asked a fellow climbing it
To look and tell me later how it was.'
'What did he say?'
'He said there was a lake


Somewhere in Ireland on a mountain top.'
'But a lake's different. What about the spring?'
'He never got up high enough to see.
That's why I don't advise your trying this side.
He tried this side. I've always meant to go
And look myself, but you know how it is:
It doesn't seem so much to climb a mountain You've worked around the foot of all your life.
What would I do? Go in my overalls,
With a big stick, the same as when the cows Haven't come down to the bars at milking time?
Or with a shotgun for a stray black bear? 'Twouldn't seem real to climb for climbing it.'
'I shouldn't climb it if I didn't want to-
Not for the sake of climbing. What's its name?'
'We call it Hor: I don't know if that's right.'
'Can one walk around it? Would it be too far?'
'You can drive round and keep in Lunenburg,
But it's as much as ever you can do,
The boundary lines keep in so close to it.
Hor is the township, and the township's Hor-
And a few houses sprinkled round the foot,
Like boulders broken off the upper cliff,
Rolled out a little farther than the rest.'
'Warm in December, cold in June, you say?'
'I don't suppose the water's changed at all.
You and I know enough to know it's warm Compared with cold, and cold compared with warm. But all the fun's in how you say a thing.'
'You've lived here all your life?'
'Ever since Hor
Was no bigger than a--' What, I did not hear.
He drew the oxen toward him with light touches
Of his slim goad on nose and offside flank,
Gave them their marching orders and was moving.

The Need Of Being Versed In Country Things
The house had gone to bring again
To the midnight sky a sunset glow.
Now the chimney was all of the house that stood, Like a pistil after the petals go.
The barn opposed across the way,
That would have joined the house in flame Had it been the will of the wind, was left To bear forsaken the place's name.
No more it opened with all one end
For teams that came by the stony road
To drum on the floor with scurrying hoofs And brush the mow with the summer load.
The birds that came to it through the air At broken windows flew out and in,
Their murmur more like the sigh we sigh From too much dwelling on what has been.
Yet for them the lilac renewed its leaf,
And the aged elm, though touched with fire; And the dry pump flung up an awkward arm; And the fence post carried a strand of wire.
For them there was really nothing sad.
But though they rejoiced in the nest they kept, One had to be versed in country things
Not to believe the phoebes wept.


The Objection To Being Stepped On
At the end of the row
I stepped on the toe Of an unemployed hoe. It rose in offense
And struck me a blow In the seat of my sense. It wasn't to blame
But I called it a name. And I must say it dealt Me a blow that I felt Like a malice prepense. You may call me a fool, But was there a rule The weapon should be Turned into a tool?
And what do we see? The first tool I step on Turned into a weapon.

The Oft-Repeated Dream
She had no saying dark enough For the dark pine that kept Forever trying the window latch Of the room where they slept.
The tireless but ineffectual hands
That with every futile pass
Made the great tree seem as a little bird Before the mystery of glass!
It never had been inside the room, And only one of the two
Was afraid in an oft-repeated dream Of what the tree might do.


The Onset
ALWAYS the same, when on a fated night
At last the gathered snow lets down as white As may be in dark woods, and with a song
It shall not make again all winter long
Of hissing on the yet uncovered ground,
I almost stumble looking up and round,
As one who overtaken by the end
Gives up his errand, and lets death descend Upon him where he is, with nothing done
To evil, no important triumph won,
More than if life had never been begun.
Yet all the precedent is on my side:
I know that winter death has never tried
The earth but it has failed: the snow may heap
In long storms an undrifted four feet deep
As measured against maple, birch and oak,
It cannot check the peeper's silver croak;
And I shall see the snow all go down hill
In water of a slender April rill
That flashes tail through last year's withered brake And dead weeds, like a disappearing snake. Nothing will be left white but here a birch,
And there a clump of houses with a church.


The Oven Bird
There is a singer eveyone has heard,
Loud, a mid-summer and a mid-wood bird,
Who makes the solid tree trunks sound again.
He says that leaves are old and that for flowers Mid-summer is to spring as one to ten.
He says the early petal-fall is past,
When pear and cherry bloom went down in showers On sunny days a moment overcast;
And comes that other fall we name the fall.
He says the highway dust is over all.
The bird would cease and be as other birds
But that he knows in singing not to sing.
The question that he frames in all but words
Is what to make of a diminished thing.


The Pasture
I'm going out to clean the pasture spring; I'll only stop to rake the leaves away
(And wait to watch the water clear, I may):
I shan't be gone long. -- You come
I'm going out to fetch the little calf That's standing by the mother. It's It totters when she licks it with her I shan't be gone long. -- You come
Robert Frost
too.
so young, tongue.
too.


The Pauper Witch of Grafton
NOW that they've got it settled whose I be,
I'm going to tell them something they won't like: They've got it settled wrong, and I can prove it. Flattered I must be to have two towns fighting
To make a present of me to each other.
They don't dispose me, either one of them,
To spare them any trouble. Double trouble's
Always the witch's motto anyway.
I'll double theirs for both of them- you watch me. They'll find they've got the whole thing to do over, That is, if facts is what they want to go by.
They set a lot (now don't they?) by a record
Of Arthur Amy's having once been up
For Hog Reeve in March Meeting here in Warren.
I could have told them any time this twelvemonth
The Arthur Amy I was married to
Couldn't have been the one they say was up
In Warren at March Meeting for the reason
He wa'n't but fifteen at the time they say.
The Arthur Amy I was married to
voted the only times he ever voted,
Which wasn't many, in the town of Wentworth.
One of the times was when 'twas in the warrant
To see if the town wanted to take over
The tote road to our clearing where we lived.
I'll tell you who'd remember- Heman Lapish.
Their Arthur Amy was the father of mine.
So now they've dragged it through the law courts once I guess they'd better drag it through again.
Wentworth and Warren's both good towns to live in, Only I happen to prefer to live
In Wentworth from now on; and when all's said, Right's right, and the temptation to do right
When I can hurt someone by doing it
Has always been too much for me, it has.
I know of some folks that'd be set up
At having in their town a noted witch:
But most would have to think of the expense
That even I would be. They ought to know


That as a witch I'd often milk a bat
And that'd be enough to last for days.
It'd make my position stronger, I think,
If I was to consent to give some sign
To make it surer that I was a witch?
It wa'n't no sign, I s'pose, when Mallice Huse
Said that I took him out in his old age
And rode all over everything on him
Until I'd had him worn to skin and bones,
And if I'd left him hitched unblanketed
In front of one Town Hall, I'd left him hitched
In front of every one in Grafton County.
Some cried shame on me not to blanket him,
The poor old man. It would have been all right
If some one hadn't said to gnaw the posts
He stood beside and leave his trade mark on them, So they could recognize them. Not a post
That they could hear tell of was scarified.
They made him keep on gnawing till he whined. Then that same smarty someone said to look-
He'd bet Huse was a cribber and had gnawed
The crib he slept in- and as sure's you're born They found he'd gnawed the four posts of his bed, All four of them to splinters. What did that prove? Not that he hadn't gnawed the hitching posts
He said he had besides. Because a horse
Gnaws in the stable ain't no proof to me
He don't gnaw trees and posts and fences too.
But everybody took it for proof.
I was a strapping girl of twenty then.
The smarty someone who spoiled everything
Was Arthur Amy. You know who he was.
That was the way he started courting me.
He never said much after we were married,
But I mistrusted he was none too proud
Of having interfered in the Huse business.
I guess he found he got more out of me
By having me a witch. Or something happened
To turn him round. He got to saying things
To undo what he'd done and make it right,
Like, 'No, she ain't come back from kiting yet.
Last night was one of her nights out. She's kiting.


She thinks when the wind makes a night of it She might as well herself.' But he liked best To let on he was plagued to death with me: If anyone had seen me coming home
Over the ridgepole, 'stride of a broomstick,
As often as he had in the tail of the night,
He guessed they'd know what he had to put up with.
Well, I showed Arthur Amy signs enough
Off from the house as far as we could keep
And from barn smells you can't wash out of ploughed ground With all the rain and snow of seven years;
And I don't mean just skulls of Roger's Rangers
On Moosilauke, but woman signs to man,
Only bewitched so I would last him longer.
Up where the trees grow short, the mosses tall,
I made him gather me wet snow berries
On slippery rocks beside a waterfall.
I made him do it for me in the dark.
And he liked everything I made him do.
I hope if he is where he sees me now
He's so far off he can't see what I've come to.
You _can_ come down from everything to nothing.
All is, if I'd a-known when I was young
And full of it, that this would be the end,
It doesn't seem as if I'd had the courage
To make so free and kick up in folks' faces.
I might have, but it doesn't seem as if.


The Peaceful Shepherd
If heaven were to do again, And on the pasture bars,
I leaned to line the figures in Between the dotted stars,
I should be tempted to forget,
I fear, the Crown of Rule,
The Scales of Trade, the Cross of Faith, As hardly worth renewal.
For these have governed in our lives, And see how men have warred.
The Cross, the Crown, the Scales may all As well have been the Sword.


The Road Not Taken
Two roads diverged in a yellow wood, And sorry I could not travel both
And be one traveler, long I stood
And looked down one as far as I could To where it bent in the undergrowth;
Then took the other, as just as fair,
And having perhaps the better claim Because it was grassy and wanted wear, Though as for that the passing there Had worn them really about the same,
And both that morning equally lay
In leaves no step had trodden black. Oh, I kept the first for another day! Yet knowing how way leads on to way I doubted if I should ever come back.
I shall be telling this with a sigh Somewhere ages and ages hence: Two roads diverged in a wood, and I, I took the one less traveled by,
And that has made all the difference.


The Rose Family
The rose is a rose,
And was always a rose.
But the theory now goes That the apple's a rose, And the pear is, and so's The plum, I suppose.
The dear only knows
What will next prove a rose. You, of course, are a rose - But were always a rose.


The Runaway
Once when the snow of the year was beginning to fall, We stopped by a mountain pasture to say 'Whose colt?' A little Morgan had one forefoot on the wall,
The other curled at his breast. He dipped his head
And snorted at us. And then he had to bolt.
We heard the miniature thunder where he fled,
And we saw him, or thought we saw him, dim and grey, Like a shadow against the curtain of falling flakes.
'I think the little fellow's afraid of the snow.
He isn't winter-broken. It isn't play
With the little fellow at all. He's running away.
I doubt if even his mother could tell him, 'Sakes,
It's only weather'. He'd think she didn't know !
Where is his mother? He can't be out alone.'
And now he comes again with a clatter of stone
And mounts the wall again with whited eyes
And all his tail that isn't hair up straight.
He shudders his coat as if to throw off flies.
'Whoever it is that leaves him out so late,
When other creatures have gone to stall and bin,
Ought to be told to come and take him in.'


The Secret Sits
We dance round in a ring and suppose,
But the Secret sits in the middle and knows.


The Silken Tent
She is as in a field a silken tent
At midday when the sunny summer breeze Has dried the dew and all its ropes relent, So that in guys it gently sways at ease,
And its supporting central cedar pole,
That is its pinnacle to heavenward
And signifies the sureness of the soul, Seems to owe naught to any single cord, But strictly held by none, is loosely bound By countless silken ties of love and thought To every thing on earth the compass round, And only by one's going slightly taut
In the capriciousness of summer air
Is of the slightlest bondage made aware.


The Soldier
He is that fallen lance that lies as hurled,
That lies unlifted now, come dew, come rust,
But still lies pointed as it ploughed the dust.
If we who sight along it round the world,
See nothing worthy to have been its mark,
It is because like men we look too near, Forgetting that as fitted to the sphere,
Our missiles always make too short an arc.
They fall, they rip the grass, they intersect
The curve of earth, and striking, break their own; They make us cringe for metal-point on stone. But this we know, the obstacle that checked
And tripped the body, shot the spirit on
Further than target ever showed or shone.


The Sound Of Trees
I wonder about the trees.
Why do we wish to bear Forever the noise of these More than another noise
So close to our dwelling place? We suffer them by the day
Till we lose all measure of pace, And fixity in our joys,
And acquire a listening air.
They are that that talks of going But never gets away;
And that talks no less for knowing, As it grows wiser and older,
That now it means to stay.
My feet tug at the floor
And my head sways to my shoulder Sometimes when I watch trees sway, From the window or the door.
I shall set forth for somewhere,
I shall make the reckless choice Some day when they are in voice And tossing so as to scare
The white clouds over them on.
I shall have less to say, But I shall be gone.


The Span Of Life
The old dog barks backwards without getting up. I can remember when he was a pup.
Anonymous submission. Robert Frost

The Star Splitter
`You know Orion always comes up sideways. Throwing a leg up over our fence of mountains, And rising on his hands, he looks in on me Busy outdoors by lantern-light with something I should have done by daylight, and indeed, After the ground is frozen, I should have done Before it froze, and a gust flings a handful
Of waste leaves at my smoky lantern chimney To make fun of my way of doing things,
Or else fun of Orion's having caught me.
Has a man, I should like to ask, no rights These forces are obliged to pay respect to?' So Brad McLaughlin mingled reckless talk
Of heavenly stars with hugger-mugger farming, Till having failed at hugger-mugger farming
He burned his house down for the fire insurance And spent the proceeds on a telescope
To satisfy a lifelong curiosity
About our place among the infinities.
`What do you want with one of those blame things?' I asked him well beforehand. `Don't you get one!'
`Don't call it blamed; there isn't anything
More blameless in the sense of being less
A weapon in our human fight,' he said.
`I'll have one if I sell my farm to buy it.'
There where he moved the rocks to plow the ground And plowed between the rocks he couldn't move,
Few farms changed hands; so rather than spend years Trying to sell his farm and then not selling,
He burned his house down for the fire insurance And bought the telescope with what it came to. He had been heard to say by several:
`The best thing that we're put here for's to see; The strongest thing that's given us to see with's A telescope. Someone in every town
Seems to me owes it to the town to keep one. In Littleton it might as well be me.'


After such loose talk it was no surprise
When he did what he did and burned his house down.
Mean laughter went about the town that day
To let him know we weren't the least imposed on, And he could wait---we'd see to him tomorrow. But the first thing next morning we reflected
If one by one we counted people out
For the least sin, it wouldn't take us long
To get so we had no one left to live with.
For to be social is to be forgiving.
Our thief, the one who does our stealing from us, We don't cut off from coming to church suppers, But what we miss we go to him and ask for.
He promptly gives it back, that is if still
Uneaten, unworn out, or undisposed of.
It wouldn't do to be too hard on Brad
About his telescope. Beyond the age
Of being given one for Christmas gift,
He had to take the best way he knew how
To find himself in one. Well, all we said was
He took a strange thing to be roguish over.
Some sympathy was wasted on the house,
A good old-timer dating back along;
But a house isn't sentient; the house
Didn't feel anything. And if it did,
Why not regard it as a sacrifice,
And an old-fashioned sacrifice by fire,
Instead of a new-fashioned one at auction?
Out of a house and so out of a farm
At one stroke (of a match), Brad had to turn To earn a living on the Concord railroad,
As under-ticket-agent at a station
Where his job, when he wasn't selling tickets, Was setting out, up track and down, not plants As on a farm, but planets, evening stars
That varied in their hue from red to green.
He got a good glass for six hundred dollars. His new job gave him leisure for stargazing. Often he bid me come and have a look


Up the brass barrel, velvet black inside,
At a star quaking in the other end.
I recollect a night of broken clouds
And underfoot snow melted down to ice,
And melting further in the wind to mud. Bradford and I had out the telescope.
We spread our two legs as we spread its three, Pointed our thoughts the way we pointed it, And standing at our leisure till the day broke, Said some of the best things we ever said.
That telescope was christened the Star-Splitter, Because it didn't do a thing but split
A star in two or three, the way you split
A globule of quicksilver in your hand
With one stroke of your finger in the middle. It's a star-splitter if there ever was one,
And ought to do some good if splitting stars 'Sa thing to be compared with splitting wood.
We've looked and looked, but after all where are we? Do we know any better where we are,
And how it stands between the night tonight
And a man with a smoky lantern chimney?
How different from the way it ever stood?

The Telephone
'When I was just as far as I could walk From here today, There was an hour All still When leaning with my head again a flower I heard you talk. Don't say I didn't, for I heard you say-- You spoke from that flower on the window sill- Do you remember what it was you said?' 'First tell me what it was you thought you heard.' 'Having found the flower and driven a bee away, I leaned on my head And holding by the stalk, I listened and I thought I caught the word-- What was it? Did you call me by my name? Or did you say-- Someone said "Come" -- I heard it as I bowed.' 'I may have thought as much, but not aloud.' "Well, so I came.'


The Times Table
More than halfway up the pass
Was a spring with a broken drinking glass, And whether the farmer drank or not
His mare was sure to observe the spot
By cramping the wheel on a water-bar, turning her forehead with a star,
And straining her ribs for a monster sigh; To which the farmer would make reply,
'A sigh for every so many breath,
And for every so many sigh a death. That's what I always tell my wife
Is the multiplication table of life.'
The saying may be ever so true;
But it's just the kind of a thing that you Nor I, nor nobody else may say,
Unless our purpose is doing harm,
And then I know of no better way
To close a road, abandon a farm,
Reduce the births of the human race,
And bring back nature in people's place.


The Trial By Existence
EVEN the bravest that are slain Shall not dissemble their surprise
On waking to find valor reign, Even as on earth, in paradise;
And where they sought without the sword Wide fields of asphodel fore’er,
To find that the utmost reward Of daring should be still to dare.
The light of heaven falls whole and white And is not shattered into dyes,
The light for ever is morning light; The hills are verdured pasture-wise;
The angel hosts with freshness go,
And seek with laughter what to brave; —
And binding all is the hushed snow Of the far-distant breaking wave.
And from a cliff-top is proclaimed The gathering of the souls for birth,
The trial by existence named, The obscuration upon earth.
And the slant spirits trooping by
In streams and cross- and counter-streams
Can but give ear to that sweet cry For its suggestion of what dreams!
And the more loitering are turned To view once more the sacrifice
Of those who for some good discerned Will gladly give up paradise.
And a white shimmering concourse rolls Toward the throne to witness there
The speeding of devoted souls Which God makes his especial care.
And none are taken but who will, Having first heard the life read out
That opens earthward, good and ill,
www.PoemHunter.com - The World's Poetry Archive 276

Beyond the shadow of a doubt; And very beautifully God limns,
And tenderly, life’s little dream, But naught extenuates or dims,
Setting the thing that is supreme.
Nor is there wanting in the press Some spirit to stand simply forth,
Heroic in its nakedness, Against the uttermost of earth.
The tale of earth’s unhonored things Sounds nobler there than ’neath the sun;
And the mind whirls and the heart sings, And a shout greets the daring one.
But always God speaks at the end: ’One thought in agony of strife
The bravest would have by for friend, The memory that he chose the life;
But the pure fate to which you go Admits no memory of choice,
Or the woe were not earthly woe
To which you give the assenting voice.’
And so the choice must be again, But the last choice is still the same;
And the awe passes wonder then, And a hush falls for all acclaim.
And God has taken a flower of gold And broken it, and used therefrom
The mystic link to bind and hold Spirit to matter till death come.
‘Tis of the essence of life here,
Though we choose greatly, still to lack
The lasting memory at all clear, That life has for us on the wrack
Nothing but what we somehow chose; Thus are we wholly stripped of pride
In the pain that has but one close, Bearing it crushed and mystified.
www.PoemHunter.com - The World's Poetry Archive 277



The Tuft Of Flowers
I went to turn the grass once after one Who mowed it in the dew before the sun.
The dew was gone that made his blade so keen Before I came to view the levelled scene.
I looked for him behind an isle of trees;
I listened for his whetstone on the breeze.
But he had gone his way, the grass all mown, And I must be, as he had been,—alone,
'As all must be,' I said within my heart, 'Whether they work together or apart.'
But as I said it, swift there passed me by On noiseless wing a bewildered butterfly,
Seeking with memories grown dim over night Some resting flower of yesterday's delight.
And once I marked his flight go round and round, As where some flower lay withering on the ground.
And then he flew as far as eye could see,
And then on tremulous wing came back to me.
I thought of questions that have no reply,
And would have turned to toss the grass to dry;
But he turned first, and led my eye to look At a tall tuft of flowers beside a brook,
A leaping tongue of bloom the scythe had spared Beside a reedy brook the scythe had bared.
I left my place to know them by their name, Finding them butterfly-weed when I came.

The mower in the dew had loved them thus, By leaving them to flourish, not for us,
Nor yet to draw one thought of ours to him, But from sheer morning gladness at the brim.
The butterfly and I had lit upon, Nevertheless, a message from the dawn,
That made me hear the wakening birds around, And hear his long scythe whispering to the ground,
And feel a spirit kindred to my own;
So that henceforth I worked no more alone;
But glad with him, I worked as with his aid, And weary, sought at noon with him the shade;
And dreaming, as it were, held brotherly speech With one whose thought I had not hoped to reach.
'Men work together,' I told him from the heart, 'Whether they work together or apart.'

The Vanishing Red
He is said to have been the last Red man
In Action. And the Miller is said to have laughed--
If you like to call such a sound a laugh.
But he gave no one else a laugher's license.
For he turned suddenly grave as if to say,
'Whose business,--if I take it on myself,
Whose business--but why talk round the barn?--
When it's just that I hold with getting a thing done with.' You can't get back and see it as he saw it.
It's too long a story to go into now.
You'd have to have been there and lived it.
They you wouldn't have looked on it as just a matter
Of who began it between the two races.
Some guttural exclamation of surprise
The Red man gave in poking about the mill
Over the great big thumping shuffling millstone Disgusted the Miller physically as coming
From one who had no right to be heard from.
'Come, John,' he said, 'you want to see the wheel-pint?'
He took him down below a cramping rafter,
And showed him, through a manhole in the floor, The water in desperate straits like frantic fish, Salmon and sturgeon, lashing with their tails.
The he shut down the trap door with a ring in it That jangled even above the general noise,
And came upstairs alone--and gave that laugh,
And said something to a man with a meal-sack
That the man with the meal-sack didn't catch--then. Oh, yes, he showed John the wheel-pit all right.


The Vantage Point
If tires of trees I seek again mankind, Well I know where to hie me--in the dawn, To a slope where the cattle keep the lawn. There amid loggin juniper reclined, Myself unseen, I see in white defined Far off the homes of men, and farther still, The graves of men on an opposing hill, Living or dead, whichever are to mind. And if by noon I have too much of these, I have but to turn on my arm, and lo, The sun-burned hillside sets my face aglow, My breathing shakes the bluet like a breeze, I smell the earth, I smell the bruis&egrave;d plant, I look into the crater of the ant.


The Witch of Coos
I staid the night for shelter at a farm
Behind the mountains, with a mother and son, Two old-believers. They did all the talking.
MOTHER Folks think a witch who has familiar spirits She could call up to pass a winter evening,
But won't, should be burned at the stake or something. Summoning spirits isn't 'Button, button,
Who's got the button,' I would have them know.
SON: Mother can make a common table rear And kick with two legs like an army mule.
MOTHER: And when I've done it, what good have I done?
Rather than tip a table for you, let me
Tell you what Ralle the Sioux Control once told me. He said the dead had souls, but when I asked him How could that be - I thought the dead were souls, He broke my trance. Don't that make you suspicious That there's something the dead are keeping back? Yes, there's something the dead are keeping back.
SON: You wouldn't want to tell him what we have Up attic, mother?
MOTHER: Bones - a skeleton.
SON: But the headboard of mother's bed is pushed Against the' attic door: the door is nailed.
It's harmless. Mother hears it in the night
Halting perplexed behind the barrier
Of door and headboard. Where it wants to get Is back into the cellar where it came from.
MOTHER: We'll never let them, will we, son! We'll never !
SON: It left the cellar forty years ago


And carried itself like a pile of dishes
Up one flight from the cellar to the kitchen,
Another from the kitchen to the bedroom,
Another from the bedroom to the attic,
Right past both father and mother, and neither stopped it.
Father had gone upstairs; mother was downstairs.
I was a baby: I don't know where I was.
MOTHER: The only fault my husband found with me - I went to sleep before I went to bed,
Especially in winter when the bed
Might just as well be ice and the clothes snow.
The night the bones came up the cellar-stairs Toffile had gone to bed alone and left me, But left an open door to cool the room off
So as to sort of turn me out of it.
I was just coming to myself enough
To wonder where the cold was coming from,
When I heard Toffile upstairs in the bedroom
And thought I heard him downstairs in the cellar. The board we had laid down to walk dry-shod on When there was water in the cellar in spring Struck the hard cellar bottom. And then someone Began the stairs, two footsteps for each step,
The way a man with one leg and a crutch,
Or a little child, comes up. It wasn't Toffile:
It wasn't anyone who could be there.
The bulkhead double-doors were double-locked And swollen tight and buried under snow.
The cellar windows were banked up with sawdust And swollen tight and buried under snow.
It was the bones. I knew them - and good reason. My first impulse was to get to the knob
And hold the door. But the bones didn't try
The door; they halted helpless on the landing, Waiting for things to happen in their favour.'
The faintest restless rustling ran all through them. I never could have done the thing I did
If the wish hadn't been too strong in me
To see how they were mounted for this walk.
I had a vision of them put together

Not like a man, but like a chandelier.
So suddenly I flung the door wide on him.
A moment he stood balancing with emotion,
And all but lost himself. (A tongue of fire
Flashed out and licked along his upper teeth. Smoke rolled inside the sockets of his eyes.)
Then he came at me with one hand outstretched, The way he did in life once; but this time
I struck the hand off brittle on the floor,
And fell back from him on the floor myself.
The finger-pieces slid in all directions.
(Where did I see one of those pieces lately?
Hand me my button-box- it must be there.)
I sat up on the floor and shouted, 'Toffile,
It's coming up to you.' It had its choice
Of the door to the cellar or the hall.
It took the hall door for the novelty,
And set off briskly for so slow a thing,
Stillgoing every which way in the joints, though, So that it looked like lightning or a scribble, &gt;From the slap I had just now given its hand.
I listened till it almost climbed the stairs &gt;From the hall to the only finished bedroom, Before I got up to do anything;
Then ran and shouted, 'Shut the bedroom door, Toffile, for my sake!' 'Company?' he said,
'Don't make me get up; I'm too warm in bed.'
So lying forward weakly on the handrail
I pushed myself upstairs, and in the light
(The kitchen had been dark) I had to own
I could see nothing. 'Toffile, I don't see it.
It's with us in the room though. It's the bones.' 'What bones?' 'The cellar bones- out of the grave.' That made him throw his bare legs out of bed
And sit up by me and take hold of me.
I wanted to put out the light and see
If I could see it, or else mow the room,
With our arms at the level of our knees,
And bring the chalk-pile down. 'I'll tell you what- It's looking for another door to try.
The uncommonly deep snow has made him think Of his old song, The Wild Colonial Boy,

He always used to sing along the tote-road. He's after an open door to get out-doors. Let's trap him with an open door up attic.' Toffile agreed to that, and sure enough, Almost the moment he was given an opening, The steps began to climb the attic stairs.
I heard them. Toffile didn't seem to hear them. 'Quick !' I slammed to the door and held the knob. 'Toffile, get nails.' I made him nail the door shut, And push the headboard of the bed against it. Then we asked was there anything
Up attic that we'd ever want again.
The attic was less to us than the cellar.
If the bones liked the attic, let them have it.
Let them stay in the attic. When they sometimes Come down the stairs at night and stand perplexed Behind the door and headboard of the bed, Brushing their chalky skull with chalky fingers,
With sounds like the dry rattling of a shutter,
That's what I sit up in the dark to say-
To no one any more since Toffile died.
2o3 Let them stay in the attic since they went there. I promised Toffile to be cruel to them
For helping them be cruel once to him.
SON: We think they had a grave down in the cellar. MOTHER: We know they had a grave down in the cellar. SON: We never could find out whose bones they were.
MOTHER: Yes, we could too, son. Tell the truth for once. They were a man's his father killed for me.
I mean a man he killed instead of me.
The least I could do was to help dig their grave.
We were about it one night in the cellar.
Son knows the story: but 'twas not for him To tell the truth, suppose the time had come. Son looks surprised to see me end a lie
We'd kept all these years between ourselves So as to have it ready for outsiders.
But to-night I don't care enough to lie-


I don't remember why I ever cared. Toffile, if he were here, I don't believe Could tell you why he ever cared himself-
She hadn't found the finger-bone she wanted Among the buttons poured out in her lap.
I verified the name next morning: Toffile. The rural letter-box said Toffile Lajway.

The Wood-Pile
Out walking in the frozen swamp one gray day,
I paused and said, "I will turn back from here.
No, I will go on farther -- and we shall see."
The hard snow held me, save where now and then One foot went through. The view was all in lines Straight up and down of tall slim trees
Too much alike to mark or name a place by So as to say for certain I was here
Or somewhere else: I was just far from home. A small bird flew before me. He was careful To put a tree between us when he lighted, And say no word to tell me who he was
Who was so foolish as to think what he thought. He thought that I was after him for a feather -- The white one in his tail; like one who takes Everything said as personal to himself.
One flight out sideways would have undeceived him. And then there was a pile of wood for which
I forgot him and let his little fear
Carry him off the way I might have gone,
Without so much as wishing him good-night.
He went behind it to make his last stand.
It was a cord of maple, cut and split
And piled -- and measured, four by four by eight. And not another like it could I see.
No runner tracks in this year's snow looped near it. And it was older sure than this year's cutting,
Or even last year's or the year's before.
The wood was gray and the bark warping off it And the pile somewhat sunken. Clematis
Had wound strings round and round it like a bundle. What held it though on one side was a tree
Still growing, and on one a stake and prop,
These latter about to fall. I thought that only Someone who lived in turning to fresh tasks
Could so forget his handiwork on which
He spent himself, the labor of his ax,
And leave it there far from a useful fireplace To warm the frozen swamp as best it could


With the slow smokeless burning of decay.
They Were Welcome To Their Belief
Grief may have thought it was grief. Care may have thought it was care. They were welcome to their belief, The overimportant pair.
No, it took all the snows that clung To the low roof over his bed, Beginning when he was young,
To induce the one snow on his head.
But whenever the roof camme white The head in the dark below
Was a shade less the color of night, A shade more the color of snow.
Grief may have thought it was grief. Care may have thought it was care. But neither one was the thief
Of his raven color of hair.
Robert Frost


To E.T.
I slumbered with your poems on my breast Spread open as I dropped them half-read through Like dove wings on a figure on a tomb
To see, if in a dream they brought of you,
I might not have the chance I missed in life Through some delay, and call you to your face First soldier, and then poet, and then both, Who died a soldier-poet of your race.
I meant, you meant, that nothing should remain Unsaid between us, brother, and this remained-- And one thing more that was not then to say: The Victory for what it lost and gained.
You went to meet the shell's embrace of fire On Vimy Ridge; and when you fell that day The war seemed over more for you than me, But now for me than you--the other way.
How over, though, for even me who knew
The foe thrust back unsafe beyond the Rhine,
If I was not to speak of it to you
And see you pleased once more with words of mine?
Robert Frost

To Earthward
Love at the lips was touch
As sweet as I could bear;
And once that seemed too much; I lived on air
That crossed me from sweet things, The flow of - was it musk
From hidden grapevine springs Down hill at dusk?
I had the swirl and ache
From sprays of honeysuckle
That when they're gathered shake Dew on the knuckle.
I craved strong sweets, but those Seemed strong when I was young; The petal of the rose
It was that stung.
Now no joy but lacks salt That is not dashed with pain And weariness and fault;
I crave the stain
Of tears, the aftermark Of almost too much love, The sweet of bitter bark And burning clove.
When stiff and sore and scarred I take away my hand
From leaning on it hard
In grass and sand,
The hurt is not enough:
I long for weight and strength To feel the earth as rough
To all my length.


To The Thawing Wind
Come with rain. O loud Southwester! Bring the singer, bring the nester; Give the buried flower a dream; Make the settled snowbank steam; Find the brown beneath the white; But whate'er you do tonight,
Bath my window, make it flow, Melt it as the ice will go;
Melt the glass and leave the sticks Like a hermit's crucifix;
Burst into my narrow stall; Swing the picture on the wall; Run the rattling pages o'er; Scatter poems on the floor; Turn the poet out of door.


Tree At My Window
Tree at my window, window tree,
My sash is lowered when night comes on; But let there never be curtain drawn Between you and me.
Vague dream head lifted out of the ground, And thing next most diffuse to cloud,
Not all your light tongues talking aloud Could be profound.
But tree, I have seen you taken and tossed, And if you have seen me when I slept,
You have seen me when I was taken and swept And all but lost.
That day she put our heads together, Fate had her imagination about her,
Your head so much concerned with outer, Mine with inner, weather.
Robert Frost


Two Look At Two
Love and forgetting might have carried them
A little further up the mountain side
With night so near, but not much further up. They must have halted soon in any case
With thoughts of a path back, how rough it was With rock and washout, and unsafe in darkness; When they were halted by a tumbled wall
With barbed-wire binding. They stood facing this, Spending what onward impulse they still had
In One last look the way they must not go,
On up the failing path, where, if a stone
Or earthslide moved at night, it moved itself;
No footstep moved it. 'This is all,' they sighed, Good-night to woods.' But not so; there was more.
A doe from round a spruce stood looking at them Across the wall, as near the wall as they.
She saw them in their field, they her in hers.
The difficulty of seeing what stood still,
Like some up-ended boulder split in two,
Was in her clouded eyes; they saw no fear there.
She seemed to think that two thus they were safe. Then, as if they were something that, though strange, She could not trouble her mind with too long,
She sighed and passed unscared along the wall.
'This, then, is all. What more is there to ask?'
But no, not yet. A snort to bid them wait.
A buck from round the spruce stood looking at them Across the wall as near the wall as they.
This was an antlered buck of lusty nostril,
Not the same doe come back into her place.
He viewed them quizzically with jerks of head,
As if to ask, 'Why don't you make some motion?
Or give some sign of life? Because you can't.
I doubt if you're as living as you look."
Thus till he had them almost feeling dared
To stretch a proffering hand -- and a spell-breaking. Then he too passed unscared along the wall.
Two had seen two, whichever side you spoke from. 'This must be all.' It was all. Still they stood,


A great wave from it going over them,
As if the earth in one unlooked-for favour
Had made them certain earth returned their love.
Robert Frost


Two Tramps In Mud Time
Out of the mud two strangers came
And caught me splitting wood in the yard,
And one of them put me off my aim
By hailing cheerily "Hit them hard!"
I knew pretty well why he had dropped behind And let the other go on a way.
I knew pretty well what he had in mind:
He wanted to take my job for pay.
Good blocks of oak it was I split,
As large around as the chopping block; And every piece I squarely hit
Fell splinterless as a cloven rock.
The blows that a life of self-control Spares to strike for the common good, That day, giving a loose my soul,
I spent on the unimportant wood.
The sun was warm but the wind was chill. You know how it is with an April day When the sun is out and the wind is still, You're one month on in the middle of May. But if you so much as dare to speak,
A cloud comes over the sunlit arch,
A wind comes off a frozen peak,
And you're two months back in the middle of March.
A bluebird comes tenderly up to alight And turns to the wind to unruffle a plume, His song so pitched as not to excite
A single flower as yet to bloom.
It is snowing a flake; and he half knew Winter was only playing possum.
Except in color he isn't blue,
But he wouldn't advise a thing to blossom.
The water for which we may have to look In summertime with a witching wand,
In every wheelrut's now a brook,


In every print of a hoof a pond.
Be glad of water, but don't forget
The lurking frost in the earth beneath That will steal forth after the sun is set And show on the water its crystal teeth.
The time when most I loved my task The two must make me love it more By coming with what they came to ask. You'd think I never had felt before
The weight of an ax-head poised aloft, The grip of earth on outspread feet, The life of muscles rocking soft
And smooth and moist in vernal heat.
Out of the wood two hulking tramps
(From sleeping God knows where last night, But not long since in the lumber camps). They thought all chopping was theirs of right. Men of the woods and lumberjacks,
They judged me by their appropriate tool. Except as a fellow handled an ax
They had no way of knowing a fool.
Nothing on either side was said.
They knew they had but to stay their stay
And all their logic would fill my head:
As that I had no right to play
With what was another man's work for gain. My right might be love but theirs was need. And where the two exist in twain
Theirs was the better right--agreed.
But yield who will to their separation, My object in living is to unite
My avocation and my vocation
As my two eyes make one in sight. Only where love and need are one, And the work is play for mortal stakes, Is the deed ever really done
For Heaven and the future's sakes.


Unharvested
A scent of ripeness from over a wall.
And come to leave the routine road
And look for what had made me stall, There sure enough was an apple tree That had eased itself of its summer load, And of all but its trivial foliage free,
Now breathed as light as a lady's fan. For there had been an apple fall
As complete as the apple had given man. The ground was one circle of solid red.
May something go always unharvested!
May much stay out of our stated plan,
Apples or something forgotten and left,
So smelling their sweetness would be no theft.


Waiting -- Afield At Dusk
What things for dream there are when spectre-like, Moving among tall haycocks lightly piled,
I enter alone upon the stubble field,
From which the laborers' voices late have died, And in the antiphony of afterglow
And rising full moon, sit me down
Upon the full moon's side of the first haycock
And lose myself amid so many alike.
I dream upon the opposing lights of the hour, Preventing shadow until the moon prevail;
I dream upon the night-hawks peopling heaven, Each circling each with vague unearthly cry,
Or plunging headlong with fierce twang afar;
And on the bat's mute antics, who would seem Dimly to have made out my secret place,
Only to lose it when he pirouettes,
And seek it endlessly with purblind haste;
On the last swallow's sweep; and on the rasp
In the abyss of odor and rustle at my back,
That, silenced by my advent, finds once more,
After an interval, his instrument,
And tries once-twice-and thrice if I be there;
And on the worn book of old-golden song
I brought not here to read, it seems, but hold
And freshen in this air of withering sweetness;
But on the memory of one absent most,
For whom these lines when they shall greet her eye.
Robert Frost
www.PoemHunter.com - The World's Poetry Archive 302

What Fifty Said..
When I was young my teachers were the old. I gave up fire for form till I was cold.
I suffered like a metal being cast.
I went to school to age to learn the past.
Now when I am old my teachers are the young. What can't be molded must be cracked and sprung. I strain at lessons fit to start a suture.
I got to school to youth to learn the future.
Robert Frost


Wild Grapes
What tree may not the fig be gathered from?
The grape may not be gathered from the birch? It's all you know the grape, or know the birch.
As a girl gathered from the birch myself
Equally with my weight in grapes, one autumn,
I ought to know what tree the grape is fruit of.
I was born, I suppose, like anyone,
And grew to be a little boyish girl
My brother could not always leave at home.
But that beginning was wiped out in fear
The day I swung suspended with the grapes,
And was come after like Eurydice
And brought down safely from the upper regions; And the life I live now's an extra life
I can waste as I please on whom I please.
So if you see me celebrate two birthdays,
And give myself out of two different ages,
One of them five years younger than I look-
One day my brother led me to a glade
Where a white birch he knew of stood alone,
Wearing a thin head-dress of pointed leaves,
And heavy on her heavy hair behind,
Against her neck, an ornament of grapes.
Grapes, I knew grapes from having seen them last year. One bunch of them, and there began to be
Bunches all round me growing in white birches,
The way they grew round Leif the Lucky's German; Mostly as much beyond my lifted hands, though,
As the moon used to seem when I was younger,
And only freely to be had for climbing.
My brother did the climbing; and at first
Threw me down grapes to miss and scatter
And have to hunt for in sweet fern and hardhack;
Which gave him some time to himself to eat,
But not so much, perhaps, as a boy needed.
So then, to make me wholly self-supporting,
He climbed still higher and bent the tree to earth
And put it in my hands to pick my own grapes.


'Here, take a tree-top, I'll get down another. Hold on with all your might when I let go.'
I said I had the tree. It wasn't true.
The opposite was true. The tree had me. The minute it was left with me alone
It caught me up as if I were the fish
And it the fishpole. So I was translated
To loud cries from my brother of 'Let go!
Don't you know anything, you girl? Let go!'
But I, with something of the baby grip
Acquired ancestrally in just such trees
When wilder mothers than our wildest now
Hung babies out on branches by the hands
To dry or wash or tan, I don't know which, (You'll have to ask an evolutionist)-
I held on uncomplainingly for life.
My brother tried to make me laugh to help me. 'What are you doing up there in those grapes? Don't be afraid. A few of them won't hurt you.
I mean, they won't pick you if you don't them.' Much danger of my picking anything!
By that time I was pretty well reduced
To a philosophy of hang-and-let-hang.
'Now you know how it feels,' my brother said,
'To be a bunch of fox-grapes, as they call them, That when it thinks it has escaped the fox
By growing where it shouldn't-on a birch,
Where a fox wouldn't think to look for it-
And if he looked and found it, couldn't reach it- Just then come you and I to gather it.
Only you have the advantage of the grapes
In one way: you have one more stem to cling by, And promise more resistance to the picker.'
One by one I lost off my hat and shoes,
And still I clung. I let my head fall back,
And shut my eyes against the sun, my ears Against my brother's nonsense; 'Drop,' he said, 'I'll catch you in my arms. It isn't far.'
(Stated in lengths of him it might not be.)
'Drop or I'll shake the tree and shake you down.' Grim silence on my part as I sank lower,


My small wrists stretching till they showed the banjo strings. 'Why, if she isn't serious about it!
Hold tight awhile till I think what to do.
I'll bend the tree down and let you down by it.'
I don't know much about the letting down;
But once I felt ground with my stocking feet
And the world came revolving back to me,
I know I looked long at my curled-up fingers,
Before I straightened them and brushed the bark off. My brother said: 'Don't you weigh anything?
Try to weigh something next time, so you won't Be run off with by birch trees into space.'
It wasn't my not weighing anything
So much as my not knowing anything-
My brother had been nearer right before.
I had not taken the first step in knowledge;
I had not learned to let go with the hands,
As still I have not learned to with the heart,
And have no wish to with the heart-nor need, That I can see. The mind-is not the heart.
I may yet live, as I know others live,
To wish in vain to let go with the mind-
Of cares, at night, to sleep; but nothing tells me That I need learn to let go with the heart.
Robert Frost


Wind And Window Flower
Lovers, forget your love,
And list to the love of these,
She a window flower,
And he a winter breeze.
When the frosty window veil
Was melted down at noon,
And the cagèd yellow bird
Hung over her in tune,
He marked her through the pane, He could not help but mark,
And only passed her by,
To come again at dark.
He was a winter wind,
Concerned with ice and snow, Dead weeds and unmated birds, And little of love could know.
But he sighed upon the sill,
He gave the sash a shake,
As witness all within
Who lay that night awake. Perchance he half prevailed
To win her for the flight
From the firelit looking-glass
And warm stove-window light. But the flower leaned aside
And thought of naught to say, And morning found the breeze
A hundred miles away.

I wandered lonely as a cloud
That floats on high o'er vales and hills,
When all at once I saw a crowd,
A host, of golden daffodils;
Beside the lake, beneath the trees,
Fluttering and dancing in the breeze.

Continuous as the stars that shine
And twinkle on the milky way,
They stretched in never-ending line
Along the margin of a bay:
Ten thousand saw I at a glance,
Tossing their heads in sprightly dance.

The waves beside them danced; but they
Out-did the sparkling waves in glee:
A poet could not but be gay,
In such a jocund company:
I gazed—and gazed—but little thought
What wealth the show to me had brought:

For oft, when on my couch I lie
In vacant or in pensive mood,
They flash upon that inward eye
Which is the bliss of solitude;
And then my heart with pleasure fills,
And dances with the daffodils.



I met a traveller from an antique land,
Who said—“Two vast and trunkless legs of stone
Stand in the desert. . . . Near them, on the sand,
Half sunk a shattered visage lies, whose frown,
And wrinkled lip, and sneer of cold command,
Tell that its sculptor well those passions read
Which yet survive, stamped on these lifeless things,
The hand that mocked them, and the heart that fed;
And on the pedestal, these words appear:
My name is Ozymandias, King of Kings;
Look on my Works, ye Mighty, and despair!
Nothing beside remains. Round the decay
Of that colossal Wreck, boundless and bare
The lone and level sands stretch far away.”
All the world's a stage,
And all the men and women merely players,
They have their exits and entrances,
And one man in his time plays many parts,
His acts being seven ages. At first the infant,
Mewling and puking in the nurse's arms.
Then, the whining schoolboy with his satchel
And shining morning face, creeping like snail
Unwillingly to school. And then the lover,
Sighing like furnace, with a woeful ballad
Made to his mistress' eyebrow. Then a soldier,
Full of strange oaths, and bearded like the pard,
Jealous in honour, sudden, and quick in quarrel,
Seeking the bubble reputation
Even in the cannon's mouth. And then the justice
In fair round belly, with good capon lin'd,
With eyes severe, and beard of formal cut,
Full of wise saws, and modern instances,
And so he plays his part. The sixth age shifts
Into the lean and slipper'd pantaloon,
With spectacles on nose, and pouch on side,
His youthful hose well sav'd, a world too wide,
For his shrunk shank, and his big manly voice,
Turning again towards childish treble, pipes
And whistles in his sound. Last scene of all,
That ends this strange eventful history,
Is second childishness and mere oblivion,
Sans teeth, sans eyes, sans taste, sans everything.

O Captain! my Captain! our fearful trip is done,
The ship has weather’d every rack, the prize we sought is won,
The port is near, the bells I hear, the people all exulting,
While follow eyes the steady keel, the vessel grim and daring;
                         But O heart! heart! heart!
                            O the bleeding drops of red,
                               Where on the deck my Captain lies,
                                  Fallen cold and dead.

O Captain! my Captain! rise up and hear the bells;
Rise up—for you the flag is flung—for you the bugle trills,
For you bouquets and ribbon’d wreaths—for you the shores a-crowding,
For you they call, the swaying mass, their eager faces turning;
                         Here Captain! dear father!
                            This arm beneath your head!
                               It is some dream that on the deck,
                                 You’ve fallen cold and dead.

My Captain does not answer, his lips are pale and still,
My father does not feel my arm, he has no pulse nor will,
The ship is anchor’d safe and sound, its voyage closed and done,
From fearful trip the victor ship comes in with object won;
                         Exult O shores, and ring O bells!
                            But I with mournful tread,
                               Walk the deck my Captain lies,
                                  Fallen cold and dead.


I celebrate myself,
And what I assume you shall assume,
For every atom belonging to me as good belongs to you.
I loafe and invite my soul,
I lean and loafe at my ease . . . . observing a spear of summer grass.
Houses and roof perfumes . . . . the shelves are crowded with perfumes, I breathe the fragrance myself, and know it and like it,
The distillation would intoxicate me also, but I shall not let it.
The atmosphere is not a perfume . . . . it has no taste of the distillation . . . . it is odorless, It is for my mouth forever . . . . I am in love with it,
I will go to the bank by the wood and become undisguised and naked,
I am mad for it to be in contact with me.
The smoke of my own breath,
Echos, ripples, and buzzed whispers . . . . loveroot, silkthread, crotch and vine,
My respiration and inspiration . . . . the beating of my heart . . . . the passing of blood and The sniff of green leaves and dry leaves, and of the shore and darkcolored sea-rocks, and
of hay in the barn,
The sound of the belched words of my voice . . . . words loosed to the eddies of the wind, A few light kisses . . . . a few embraces . . . . a reaching around of arms,
The play of shine and shade on the trees as the supple boughs wag,
The delight alone or in the rush of the streets, or along the fields and hillsides,
The feeling of health . . . . the full-noon trill . . . . the song of me rising from bed and
meeting the sun.
Have you reckoned a thousand acres much? Have you reckoned the earth much? Have you practiced so long to learn to read?
Have you felt so proud to get at the meaning of poems?
Stop this day and night with me and you shall possess the origin of all poems,
You shall possess the good of the earth and sun . . . . there are millions of suns left,
You shall no longer take things at second or third hand . . . . nor look through the eyes of
the dead . . . . nor feed on the spectres in books,
You shall not look through my eyes either, nor take things from me, You shall listen to all sides and filter them from yourself.
I have heard what the talkers were talking . . . . the talk of the beginning and the end, But I do not talk of the beginning or the end.
There was never any more inception than there is now,

Nor any more youth or age than there is now;
And will never be any more perfection than there is now, Nor any more heaven or hell than there is now.
Urge and urge and urge,
Always the procreant urge of the world.
Out of the dimness opposite equals advance . . . . Always substance and increase, Always a knit of identity . . . . always distinction . . . . always a breed of life.
To elaborate is no avail . . . . Learned and unlearned feel that it is so.
Sure as the most certain sure . . . . plumb in the uprights, well entretied, braced in the beams,
Stout as a horse, affectionate, haughty, electrical, I and this mystery here we stand.
Clear and sweet is my soul . . . . and clear and sweet is all that is not my soul.
Lack one lacks both . . . . and the unseen is proved by the seen, Till that becomes unseen and receives proof in its turn.
Showing the best and dividing it from the worst, age vexes age,
Knowing the perfect fitness and equanimity of things, while they discuss I am silent, and go
bathe and admire myself.
Welcome is every organ and attribute of me, and of any man hearty and clean,
Not an inch nor a particle of an inch is vile, and none shall be less familiar than the rest.
I am satisfied . . . . I see, dance, laugh, sing;
As God comes a loving bedfellow and sleeps at my side all night and close on the peep of
the day,
And leaves for me baskets covered with white towels bulging the house with their plenty, Shall I postpone my acceptation and realization and scream at my eyes,
That they turn from gazing after and down the road,
And forthwith cipher and show me to a cent,
Exactly the contents of one, and exactly the contents of two, and which is ahead?
Trippers and askers surround me,
People I meet . . . . . the effect upon me of my early life . . . . of the ward and city I live in . . . . . of the nation,
The latest news . . . . discoveries, inventions, societies . . . . authors old and new,
My dinner, dress, associates, looks, business, compliments, dues,
The real or fancied indifference of some man or woman I love,
The sickness of one of my folks—or of myself . . . . or
ill-doing . . . . or loss or lack of money . . . . or depressions or exaltations, They come to me days and nights and go from me again,


But they are not the Me myself.
Apart from the pulling and hauling stands what I am,
Stands amused, complacent, compassionating, idle, unitary, Looks down, is erect, bends an arm on an impalpable certain rest, Looks with its sidecurved head curious what will come next,
Both in and out of the game, and watching and wondering at it.
Backward I see in my own days where I sweated through fog with linguists and contenders, I have no mockings or arguments . . . . I witness and wait.
I believe in you my soul . . . . the other I am must not abase itself to you, And you must not be abased to the other.
Loafe with me on the grass . . . . loose the stop from your throat,
Not words, not music or rhyme I want . . . . not custom or lecture, not even the best, Only the lull I like, the hum of your valved voice.
I mind how we lay in June, such a transparent summer morning;
You settled your head athwart my hips and gently turned over upon me,
And parted the shirt from my bosom-bone, and plunged your tongue to my barestript
heart,
And reached till you felt my beard, and reached till you held my feet.
Swiftly arose and spread around me the peace and joy and knowledge that pass all the art and argument of the earth;
And I know that the hand of God is the elderhand of my own,
And I know that the spirit of God is the eldest brother of my own,
And that all the men ever born are also my brothers . . . . and the women my sisters and
lovers,
And that a kelson of the creation is love;
And limitless are leaves stiff or drooping in the fields,
And brown ants in the little wells beneath them,
And mossy scabs of the wormfence, and heaped stones, and elder and mullen and
pokeweed.
A child said, What is the grass? fetching it to me with full hands;
How could I answer the child? . . . . I do not know what it is any more than he.
I guess it must be the flag of my disposition, out of hopeful green stuff woven.
Or I guess it is the handkerchief of the Lord,
A scented gift and remembrancer designedly dropped,
Bearing the owner’s name someway in the corners, that we may see and remark, and say Whose?


Or I guess the grass is itself a child . . . . the produced babe of the vegetation.
Or I guess it is a uniform hieroglyphic,
And it means, Sprouting alike in broad zones and narrow zones,
Growing among black folks as among white,
Kanuck, Tuckahoe, Congressman, Cuff, I give them the same, I receive them the same.
And now it seems to me the beautiful uncut hair of graves.
Tenderly will I use you curling grass,
It may be you transpire from the breasts of young men,
It may be if I had known them I would have loved them;
It may be you are from old people and from women, and from offspring taken soon out of
their mothers’ laps,
And here you are the mothers’ laps.
This grass is very dark to be from the white heads of old mothers, Darker than the colorless beards of old men,
Dark to come from under the faint red roofs of mouths.
O I perceive after all so many uttering tongues!
And I perceive they do not come from the roofs of mouths
for nothing.
I wish I could translate the hints about the dead young men and women,
And the hints about old men and mothers, and the offspring taken soon out of their laps.
What do you think has become of the young and old men?
And what do you think has become of the women and children?
They are alive and well somewhere;
The smallest sprout shows there is really no death,
And if ever there was it led forward life, and does not wait at the end to arrest it, And ceased the moment life appeared.
All goes onward and outward . . . . and nothing collapses,
And to die is different from what any one supposed, and luckier.
Has any one supposed it lucky to be born?
I hasten to inform him or her it is just as lucky to die, and I know it.
I pass death with the dying, and birth with the new-washed babe . . . . and am not contained between my hat and boots,
And peruse manifold objects, no two alike, and every one good, The earth good, and the stars good, and their adjuncts all good.
I am not an earth nor an adjunct of an earth,


I am the mate and companion of people, all just as immortal and fathomless as myself; They do not know how immortal, but I know.
Every kind for itself and its own . . . . for me mine male and female,
For me all that have been boys and that love women,
For me the man that is proud and feels how it stings to be slighted,
For me the sweetheart and the old maid . . . . for me mothers and the mothers of mothers, For me lips that have smiled, eyes that have shed tears,
For me children and the begetters of children.
Who need be afraid of the merge?
Undrape . . . . you are not guilty to me, nor stale nor discarded,
I see through the broadcloth and gingham whether or no,
And am around, tenacious, acquisitive, tireless . . . . and can never be shaken away.
The little one sleeps in its cradle,
I lift the gauze and look a long time, and silently brush away flies with my hand. The youngster and the redfaced girl turn aside up the bushy hill,
I peeringly view them from the top.
The suicide sprawls on the bloody floor of the bedroom.
It is so . . . . I witnessed the corpse . . . . there the pistol had fallen.
The blab of the pave . . . . the tires of carts and sluff of bootsoles and talk of the promenaders,
The heavy omnibus, the driver with his interrogating thumb, the clank of the shod horses on the granite floor,
The carnival of sleighs, the clinking and shouted jokes and pelts of snowballs; The hurrahs for popular favorites . . . . the fury of roused mobs,
The flap of the curtained litter—the sick man inside, borne to the hospital, The meeting of enemies, the sudden oath, the blows and fall,
The excited crowd—the policeman with his star quickly working his passage to the centre of the crowd;
The impassive stones that receive and return so many echoes,
The souls moving along . . . . are they invisible while the least atom of the stones is visible? What groans of overfed or half-starved who fall on the flags sunstruck or in fits,
What exclamations of women taken suddenly, who hurry home and give birth to babes, What living and buried speech is always vibrating here . . . . what howls restrained by
decorum,
Arrests of criminals, slights, adulterous offers made, acceptances, rejections with convex
lips,
I mind them or the resonance of them . . . . I come again and again.
The big doors of the country-barn stand open and ready
The dried grass of the harvest-time loads the slow-drawn wagon, The clear light plays on the brown gray and green intertinged, The armfuls are packed to the sagging mow:


I am there . . . . I help . . . . I came stretched atop of the load, I felt its soft jolts . . . . one leg reclined on the other,
I jump from the crossbeams, and seize the clover and timothy, And roll head over heels, and tangle my hair full of wisps.
Alone far in the wilds and mountains I hunt,
Wandering amazed at my own lightness and glee,
In the late afternoon choosing a safe spot to pass the night,
Kindling a fire and broiling the freshkilled game,
Soundly falling asleep on the gathered leaves, my dog and gun by my side.
The Yankee clipper is under her three skysails . . . . she cuts the sparkle and scud, My eyes settle the land . . . . I bend at her prow or shout joyously from the deck.
The boatmen and clamdiggers arose early and stopped for me,
I tucked my trowser-ends in my boots and went and had a good time, You should have been with us that day round the chowder-kettle.
I saw the marriage of the trapper in the open air in the far-west . . . . the bride was a red girl,
Her father and his friends sat near by crosslegged and dumbly smoking . . . . they had moccasins to their feet and large thick blankets hanging from their shoulders;
On a bank lounged the trapper . . . . he was dressed mostly in skins . . . . his luxuriant beard and curls protected his neck,
One hand rested on his rifle . . . . the other hand held firmly the wrist of the red girl, She had long eyelashes . . . . her head was bare . . . . her coarse straight locks descended
upon her voluptuous limbs and reached to her feet.
The runaway slave came to my house and stopped outside,
I heard his motions crackling the twigs of the woodpile,
Through the swung half-door of the kitchen I saw him limpsey and weak,
And went where he sat on a log, and led him in and assured him,
And brought water and filled a tub for his sweated body and bruised feet,
And gave him a room that entered from my own, and gave him some coarse clean clothes, And remember perfectly well his revolving eyes and his awkwardness,
And remember putting plasters on the galls of his neck and ankles;
He staid with me a week before he was recuperated and passed north,
I had him sit next me at table . . . . my firelock leaned in the corner.
Twenty-eight young men bathe by the shore, Twenty-eight young men, and all so friendly, Twenty-eight years of womanly life, and all so lonesome.
She owns the fine house by the rise of the bank,
She hides handsome and richly drest aft the blinds of the window.
Which of the young men does she like the best?


Ah the homeliest of them is beautiful to her.
Where are you off to, lady? for I see you,
You splash in the water there, yet stay stock still in your room.
Dancing and laughing along the beach came the twenty-ninth bather, The rest did not see her, but she saw them and loved them.
The beards of the young men glistened with wet, it ran from their long hair, Little streams passed all over their bodies.
An unseen hand also passed over their bodies,
It descended tremblingly from their temples and ribs.
The young men float on their backs, their white bellies swell to the sun . . . . they do not ask who seizes fast to them,
They do not know who puffs and declines with pendant and bending arch, They do not think whom they souse with spray.
The butcher-boy puts off his killing-clothes, or sharpens his knife at the stall in the market, I loiter enjoying his repartee and his shuffle and breakdown.
Blacksmiths with grimed and hairy chests environ the anvil,
Each has his main-sledge . . . . they are all out . . . . there is a great heat in the fire.
From the cinder-strewed threshold I follow their movements,
The lithe sheer of their waists plays even with their massive arms, Overhand the hammers roll—overhand so slow—overhand so sure, They do not hasten, each man hits in his place.
The negro holds firmly the reins of his four horses . . . . the block swags underneath on its tied-over chain,
The negro that drives the huge dray of the stoneyard . . . . steady and tall he stands poised on one leg on the stringpiece,
His blue shirt exposes his ample neck and breast and loosens over his hipband,
His glance is calm and commanding . . . . he tosses the slouch of his hat away from his
forehead,
The sun falls on his crispy hair and moustache . . . . falls on the black of his polish’d and
perfect limbs.
I behold the picturesque giant and love him . . . . and I do not stop there, I go with the team also.
In me the caresser of life wherever moving . . . . backward as well as forward slueing, To niches aside and junior bending.
Oxen that rattle the yoke or halt in the shade, what is that you express in your eyes?


It seems to me more than all the print I have read in my life.
My tread scares the wood-drake and wood-duck on my distant and daylong ramble, They rise together, they slowly circle around. . . . . I believe in those winged purposes, And acknowledge the red yellow and white playing within me,
And consider the green and violet and the tufted crown intentional;
And do not call the tortoise unworthy because she is not something else,
And the mockingbird in the swamp never studied the gamut, yet trills pretty well to me, And the look of the bay mare shames silliness out of me.
The wild gander leads his flock through the cool night, Ya-honk! he says, and sounds it down to me like an invitation; The pert may suppose it meaningless, but I listen closer,
I find its purpose and place up there toward the November sky.
The sharphoofed moose of the north, the cat on the housesill, the chickadee, the prairie- dog,
The litter of the grunting sow as they tug at her teats,
The brood of the turkeyhen, and she with her halfspread wings, I see in them and myself the same old law.
The press of my foot to the earth springs a hundred affections, They scorn the best I can do to relate them.
I am enamoured of growing outdoors,
Of men that live among cattle or taste of the ocean or woods,
Of the builders and steerers of ships, of the wielders of axes and mauls, of the drivers of
horses,
I can eat and sleep with them week in and week out.
What is commonest and cheapest and nearest and easiest is Me, Me going in for my chances, spending for vast returns, Adorning myself to bestow myself on the first that will take me, Not asking the sky to come down to my goodwill,
Scattering it freely forever.
The pure contralto sings in the organloft,
The carpenter dresses his plank . . . . the tongue of his foreplane whistles its wild ascending
lisp,
The married and unmarried children ride home to their thanksgiving dinner, The pilot seizes the king-pin, he heaves down with a strong arm,
The mate stands braced in the whaleboat, lance and harpoon are ready,
The duck-shooter walks by silent and cautious stretches,
The deacons are ordained with crossed hands at the altar,
The spinning-girl retreats and advances to the hum of the big wheel,
The farmer stops by the bars of a Sunday and looks at the oats and rye,


The lunatic is carried at last to the asylum a confirmed case,
He will never sleep any more as he did in the cot in his mother’s bedroom;
The jour printer with gray head and gaunt jaws works at his case,
He turns his quid of tobacco, his eyes get blurred with the manuscript;
The malformed limbs are tied to the anatomist’s table,
What is removed drops horribly in a pail;
The quadroon girl is sold at the stand . . . . the drunkard nods by the barroom stove,
The machinist rolls up his sleeves . . . . the policeman travels his beat . . . . the gate-keeper
marks who pass,
The young fellow drives the express-wagon . . . . I love him though I do not know him; The half-breed straps on his light boots to compete in the race,
The western turkey-shooting draws old and young . . . . some lean on their rifles, some sit
on logs,
Out from the crowd steps the marksman and takes his position and levels his piece;
The groups of newly-come immigrants cover the wharf or levee,
The woollypates hoe in the sugarfield, the overseer views them from his saddle;
The bugle calls in the ballroom, the gentlemen run for their partners, the dancers bow to
each other;
The youth lies awake in the cedar-roofed garret and harks to the musical rain,
The Wolverine sets traps on the creek that helps fill the Huron,
The reformer ascends the platform, he spouts with his mouth and nose,
The company returns from its excursion, the darkey brings up the rear and bears the well-
riddled target,
The squaw wrapt in her yellow-hemmed cloth is offering moccasins and beadbags for sale, The connoisseur peers along the exhibition-gallery with halfshut eyes bent sideways,
The deckhands make fast the steamboat, the plank is thrown for the shoregoing
passengers,
The young sister holds out the skein, the elder sister winds it off in a ball and stops now
and then for the knots,
The one-year wife is recovering and happy, a week ago she bore her first child,
The cleanhaired Yankee girl works with her sewing-machine or in the factory or mill, The nine months’ gone is in the parturition chamber, her faintness and pains are
advancing;
The pavingman leans on his twohanded rammer—the reporter’s lead flies swiftly over the
notebook—the signpainter is lettering with red and gold,
The canal-boy trots on the towpath—the bookkeeper counts at his desk—the shoemaker
waxes his thread,
The conductor beats time for the band and all the performers follow him,
The child is baptised—the convert is making the first professions,
The regatta is spread on the bay . . . . how the white sails sparkle!
The drover watches his drove, he sings out to them that would stray,
The pedlar sweats with his pack on his back—the purchaser higgles about the odd cent, The camera and plate are prepared, the lady must sit for her daguerreotype,
The bride unrumples her white dress, the minutehand of the clock moves slowly,
The opium eater reclines with rigid head and just-opened lips,
The prostitute draggles her shawl, her bonnet bobs on her tipsy and pimpled neck, The crowd laugh at her blackguard oaths, the men jeer and wink to each other,


(Miserable! I do not laugh at your oaths nor jeer you,)
The President holds a cabinet council, he is surrounded by the great secretaries,
On the piazza walk five friendly matrons with twined arms;
The crew of the fish-smack pack repeated layers of halibut in the hold,
The Missourian crosses the plains toting his wares and his cattle,
The fare-collector goes through the train—he gives notice by the jingling of loose change, The floormen are laying the floor—the tinners are tinning the roof—the masons are calling
for mortar,
In single file each shouldering his hod pass onward the laborers;
Seasons pursuing each other the indescribable crowd is gathered . . . . it is the Fourth of
July . . . . what salutes of cannon and small arms!
Seasons pursuing each other the plougher ploughs and the mower mows and the
wintergrain falls in the ground;
Off on the lakes the pikefisher watches and waits by the hole in the frozen surface,
The stumps stand thick round the clearing, the squatter strikes deep with his axe,
The flatboatmen make fast toward dusk near the cottonwood or pekantrees,
The coon-seekers go now through the regions of the Red river, or through those drained
by the Tennessee, or through those of the Arkansas,
The torches shine in the dark that hangs on the Chattahoochee or Altamahaw; Patriarchs sit at supper with sons and grandsons and great grandsons around them, In walls of adobe, in canvass tents, rest hunters and trappers after their day’s sport. The city sleeps and the country sleeps,
The living sleep for their time . . . . the dead sleep for their time,
The old husband sleeps by his wife and the young husband sleeps by his wife; And these one and all tend inward to me, and I tend outward to them,
And such as it is to be of these more or less I am.
I am of old and young, of the foolish as much as the wise,
Regardless of others, ever regardful of others,
Maternal as well as paternal, a child as well as a man,
Stuffed with the stuff that is coarse, and stuffed with the stuff that is fine,
One of the great nation, the nation of many nations—the smallest the same and the largest
the same,
A southerner soon as a northerner, a planter nonchalant and hospitable,
A Yankee bound my own way . . . . ready for trade . . . . my joints the limberest joints on
earth and the sternest joints on earth,
A Kentuckian walking the vale of the Elkhorn in my deerskin leggings,
A boatman over the lakes or bays or along coasts . . . . a Hoosier, a Badger, a Buckeye,
A Louisianian or Georgian, a poke-easy from sandhills and pines,
At home on Canadian snowshoes or up in the bush, or with fishermen off Newfoundland, At home in the fleet of iceboats, sailing with the rest and tacking,
At home on the hills of Vermont or in the woods of Maine or the Texan ranch,
Comrade of Californians . . . . comrade of free northwesterners, loving their big
proportions,
Comrade of raftsmen and coalmen—comrade of all who shake hands and welcome to
drink and meat;
A learner with the simplest, a teacher of the thoughtfulest,


A novice beginning experient of myriads of seasons,
Of every hue and trade and rank, of every caste and religion,
Not merely of the New World but of Africa Europe or Asia . . . . a wandering savage, A farmer, mechanic, or artist . . . . a gentleman, sailor, lover or quaker,
A prisoner, fancy-man, rowdy, lawyer, physician or priest.
I resist anything better than my own diversity, And breathe the air and leave plenty after me, And am not stuck up, and am in my place.
The moth and the fisheggs are in their place,
The suns I see and the suns I cannot see are in their place, The palpable is in its place and the impalpable is in its place.
These are the thoughts of all men in all ages and lands, they are not original with me, If they are not yours as much as mine they are nothing or next to nothing,
If they do not enclose everything they are next to nothing,
If they are not the riddle and the untying of the riddle they are nothing,
If they are not just as close as they are distant they are nothing.
This is the grass that grows wherever the land is and the water is, This is the common air that bathes the globe.
This is the breath of laws and songs and behaviour,
This is the the tasteless water of souls . . . . this is the true sustenance,
It is for the illiterate . . . . it is for the judges of the supreme court . . . . it is for the federal
capitol and the state capitols,
It is for the admirable communes of literary men and composers and singers and lecturers
and engineers and savans,
It is for the endless races of working people and farmers and seamen.
This is the trill of a thousand clear cornets and scream of the octave flute and strike of triangles.
I play not a march for victors only . . . . I play great marches for conquered and slain persons.
Have you heard that it was good to gain the day?
I also say it is good to fall . . . . battles are lost in the same spirit in which they are won.
I sound triumphal drums for the dead . . . . I fling through my embouchures the loudest and gayest music to them,
Vivas to those who have failed, and to those whose war-vessels sank in the sea, and those themselves who sank in the sea,
And to all generals that lost engagements, and all overcome heroes, and the numberless unknown heroes equal to the greatest heroes known.


This is the meal pleasantly set . . . . this is the meat and drink for natural hunger,
It is for the wicked just the same as the righteous . . . . I make appointments with all,
I will not have a single person slighted or left away,
The keptwoman and sponger and thief are hereby invited . . . . the heavy-lipped slave is
invited . . . . the venerealee is invited,
There shall be no difference between them and the rest.
This is the press of a bashful hand . . . . this is the float and odor of hair, This is the touch of my lips to yours . . . . this is the murmur of yearning, This is the far-off depth and height reflecting my own face,
This is the thoughtful merge of myself and the outlet again.
Do you guess I have some intricate purpose?
Well I have . . . . for the April rain has, and the mica on the side of a rock has.
Do you take it I would astonish?
Does the daylight astonish? or the early redstart twittering through the woods? Do I astonish more than they?
This hour I tell things in confidence,
I might not tell everybody but I will tell you.
Who goes there! hankering, gross, mystical, nude? How is it I extract strength from the beef I eat?
What is a man anyhow? What am I? and what are you? All I mark as my own you shall offset it with your own, Else it were time lost listening to me.
I do not snivel that snivel the world over,
That months are vacuums and the ground but wallow and filth,
That life is a suck and a sell, and nothing remains at the end but threadbare crape and
tears.
Whimpering and truckling fold with powders for invalids . . . . conformity goes to the fourth-removed,
I cock my hat as I please indoors or out.
Shall I pray? Shall I venerate and be ceremonious?
I have pried through the strata and analyzed to a hair,
And counselled with doctors and calculated close and found no sweeter fat than sticks to
my own bones.
In all people I see myself, none more and not one a barleycorn less, And the good or bad I say of myself I say of them.


And I know I am solid and sound,
To me the converging objects of the universe perpetually flow, All are written to me, and I must get what the writing means.
And I know I am deathless,
I know this orbit of mine cannot be swept by a carpenter’s compass,
I know I shall not pass like a child’s carlacue cut with a burnt stick at night.
I know I am august,
I do not trouble my spirit to vindicate itself or be understood,
I see that the elementary laws never apologize,
I reckon I behave no prouder than the level I plant my house by after all.
I exist as I am, that is enough,
If no other in the world be aware I sit content, And if each and all be aware I sit content.
One world is aware, and by far the largest to me, and that is myself,
And whether I come to my own today or in ten thousand or ten million years, I can cheerfully take it now, or with equal cheerfulness I can wait.
My foothold is tenoned and mortised in granite, I laugh at what you call dissolution,
And I know the amplitude of time.
I am the poet of the body, And I am the poet of the soul.
The pleasures of heaven are with me, and the pains of hell are with me,
The first I graft and increase upon myself . . . . the latter I translate into a new tongue.
I am the poet of the woman the same as the man,
And I say it is as great to be a woman as to be a man,
And I say there is nothing greater than the mother of men.
I chant a new chant of dilation or pride,
We have had ducking and deprecating about enough, I show that size is only developement.
Have you outstript the rest? Are you the President?
It is a trifle . . . . they will more than arrive there every one, and still pass on.
I am he that walks with the tender and growing night; I call to the earth and sea half-held by the night.
Press close barebosomed night! Press close magnetic nourishing night! Night of south winds! Night of the large few stars!


Still nodding night! Mad naked summer night!
Smile O voluptuous coolbreathed earth!
Earth of the slumbering and liquid trees!
Earth of departed sunset! Earth of the mountains misty-topt!
Earth of the vitreous pour of the full moon just tinged with blue! Earth of shine and dark mottling the tide of the river!
Earth of the limpid gray of clouds brighter and clearer for my sake! Far-swooping elbowed earth! Rich apple-blossomed earth!
Smile, for your lover comes!
Prodigal! you have given me love! . . . . therefore I to you give love! O unspeakable passionate love!
Thruster holding me tight and that I hold tight!
We hurt each other as the bridegroom and the bride hurt each other.
You sea! I resign myself to you also . . . . I guess what you mean,
I behold from the beach your crooked inviting fingers,
I believe you refuse to go back without feeling of me;
We must have a turn together . . . . I undress . . . . hurry me out of sight of the land, Cushion me soft . . . . rock me in billowy drowse,
Dash me with amorous wet . . . . I can repay you.
Sea of stretched ground-swells!
Sea breathing broad and convulsive breaths!
Sea of the brine of life! Sea of unshovelled and always-ready graves! Howler and scooper of storms! Capricious and dainty sea!
I am integral with you . . . . I too am of one phase and of all phases.
Partaker of influx and efflux . . . . extoler of hate and conciliation, Extoler of amies and those that sleep in each others’ arms.
I am he attesting sympathy;
Shall I make my list of things in the house and skip the house that supports them?
I am the poet of commonsense and of the demonstrable and of immortality;
And am not the poet of goodness only . . . . I do not decline to be the poet of wickedness
also.
Washes and razors for foofoos . . . . for me freckles and a bristling beard.
What blurt is it about virtue and about vice?
Evil propels me, and reform of evil propels me . . . . I stand indifferent, My gait is no faultfinder’s or rejecter’s gait,
I moisten the roots of all that has grown.


Did you fear some scrofula out of the unflagging pregnancy?
Did you guess the celestial laws are yet to be worked over and rectified?
I step up to say that what we do is right and what we affirm is right . . . . and some is only the ore of right,
Witnesses of us . . . . one side a balance and the antipodal side a balance, Soft doctrine as steady help as stable doctrine,
Thoughts and deeds of the present our rouse and early start.
This minute that comes to me over the past decillions, There is no better than it and now.
What behaved well in the past or behaves well today is not such a wonder, The wonder is always and always how there can be a mean man or an infidel.
Endless unfolding of words of ages!
And mine a word of the modern . . . . a word en masse.
A word of the faith that never balks,
One time as good as another time . . . . here or henceforward it is all the same to me.
A word of reality . . . . materialism first and last imbueing.
Hurrah for positive science! Long live exact demonstration!
Fetch stonecrop and mix it with cedar and branches of lilac;
This is the lexicographer or chemist . . . . this made a grammar of the old cartouches, These mariners put the ship through dangerous unknown seas,
This is the geologist, and this works with the scalpel, and this is a mathematician.
Gentlemen I receive you, and attach and clasp hands with you,
The facts are useful and real . . . . they are not my dwelling . . . . I enter by them to an area
of the dwelling.
I am less the reminder of property or qualities, and more the reminder of life, And go on the square for my own sake and for others’ sakes,
And make short account of neuters and geldings, and favor men and women fully
equipped,
And beat the gong of revolt, and stop with fugitives and them that plot and conspire.
Walt Whitman, an American, one of the roughs, a kosmos,
Disorderly fleshy and sensual . . . . eating drinking and breeding,
No sentimentalist . . . . no stander above men and women or apart from them . . . . no
more modest than immodest.
Unscrew the locks from the doors!
Unscrew the doors themselves from their jambs!


Whoever degrades another degrades me . . . . and whatever is done or said returns at last to me,
And whatever I do or say I also return.
Through me the afflatus surging and surging . . . . through me the current and index.
I speak the password primeval . . . . I give the sign of democracy;
By God! I will accept nothing which all cannot have their counterpart of on the same terms.
Through me many long dumb voices,
Voices of the interminable generations of slaves,
Voices of prostitutes and of deformed persons,
Voices of the diseased and despairing, and of thieves and dwarfs,
Voices of cycles of preparation and accretion,
And of the threads that connect the stars—and of wombs, and of the fatherstuff, And of the rights of them the others are down upon,
Of the trivial and flat and foolish and despised,
Of fog in the air and beetles rolling balls of dung.
Through me forbidden voices,
Voices of sexes and lusts . . . . voices veiled, and I remove the veil, Voices indecent by me clarified and transfigured.
I do not press my finger across my mouth,
I keep as delicate around the bowels as around the head and heart, Copulation is no more rank to me than death is.
I believe in the flesh and the appetites,
Seeing hearing and feeling are miracles, and each part and tag of me is a miracle.
Divine am I inside and out, and I make holy whatever I touch or am touched from; The scent of these arm-pits is aroma finer than prayer,
This head is more than churches or bibles or creeds.
If I worship any particular thing it shall be some of the spread of my body; Translucent mould of me it shall be you,
Shaded ledges and rests, firm masculine coulter, it shall be you,
Whatever goes to the tilth of me it shall be you,
You my rich blood, your milky stream pale strippings of my life;
Breast that presses against other breasts it shall be you,
My brain it shall be your occult convolutions,
Root of washed sweet-flag, timorous pond-snipe, nest of guarded duplicate eggs, it shall be
you,
Mixed tussled hay of head and beard and brawn it shall be you, Trickling sap of maple, fibre of manly wheat, it shall be you; Sun so generous it shall be you,
Vapors lighting and shading my face it shall be you,


You sweaty brooks and dews it shall be you,
Winds whose soft-tickling genitals rub against me it shall be you,
Broad muscular fields, branches of liveoak, loving lounger in my winding paths, it shall be
you,
Hands I have taken, face I have kissed, mortal I have ever touched, it shall be you.
I dote on myself . . . . there is that lot of me, and all so luscious, Each moment and whatever happens thrills me with joy.
I cannot tell how my ankles bend . . . . nor whence the cause of my faintest wish,
Nor the cause of the friendship I emit . . . . nor the cause of the friendship I take again.
To walk up my stoop is unaccountable . . . . I pause to consider if it really be, That I eat and drink is spectacle enough for the great authors and schools,
A morning-glory at my window satisfies me more than the metaphysics of books.
To behold the daybreak!
The little light fades the immense and diaphanous shadows, The air tastes good to my palate.
Hefts of the moving world at innocent gambols, silently rising, freshly exuding, Scooting obliquely high and low.
Something I cannot see puts upward libidinous prongs, Seas of bright juice suffuse heaven.
The earth by the sky staid with . . . . the daily close of their junction, The heaved challenge from the east that moment over my head, The mocking taunt, See then whether you shall be master!
Dazzling and tremendous how quick the sunrise would kill me, If I could not now and always send sunrise out of me.
We also ascend dazzling and tremendous as the sun,
We found our own my soul in the calm and cool of the daybreak.
My voice goes after what my eyes cannot reach,
With the twirl of my tongue I encompass worlds and volumes of worlds.
Speech is the twin of my vision . . . . it is unequal to measure itself.
It provokes me forever,
It says sarcastically, Walt, you understand enough . . . . why don’t you let it out then?
Come now I will not be tantalized . . . . you conceive too much of articulation. Do you not know how the buds beneath are folded?


Waiting in gloom protected by frost,
The dirt receding before my prophetical screams,
I underlying causes to balance them at last,
My knowledge my live parts . . . . it keeping tally with the meaning of things, Happiness . . . . which whoever hears me let him or her set out in search of this day.
My final merit I refuse you . . . . I refuse putting from me the best I am.
Encompass worlds but never try to encompass me, I crowd your noisiest talk by looking toward you.
Writing and talk do not prove me,
I carry the plenum of proof and every thing else in my face, With the hush of my lips I confound the topmost skeptic.
I think I will do nothing for a long time but listen,
And accrue what I hear into myself . . . . and let sounds contribute toward me.
I hear the bravuras of birds . . . . the bustle of growing wheat . . . . gossip of flames . . . . clack of sticks cooking my meals.
I hear the sound of the human voice . . . . a sound I love, I hear all sounds as they are tuned to their uses . . . .
sounds of the city and sounds out of the city . . . . sounds of the day and night; Talkative young ones to those that like them . . . . the recitative of fish-pedlars and fruit-
pedlars . . . . the loud laugh of workpeople at their meals,
The angry base of disjointed friendship . . . . the faint tones of the sick,
The judge with hands tight to the desk, his shaky lips pronouncing a death-sentence,
The heave’e’yo of stevedores unlading ships by the wharves . . . . the refrain of the anchor-
lifters;
The ring of alarm-bells . . . . the cry of fire . . . . the whirr of swift-streaking engines and
hose-carts with premonitory tinkles and colored lights,
The steam-whistle . . . . the solid roll of the train of approaching cars;
The slow-march played at night at the head of the association,
They go to guard some corpse . . . . the flag-tops are draped with black muslin.
I hear the violoncello or man’s heart’s complaint, And hear the keyed cornet or else the echo of sunset.
I hear the chorus . . . . it is a grand-opera . . . . this indeed is music!
A tenor large and fresh as the creation fills me,
The orbic flex of his mouth is pouring and filling me full.
I hear the trained soprano . . . . she convulses me like the climax of my love-grip; The orchestra whirls me wider than Uranus flies,
It wrenches unnamable ardors from my breast,


It throbs me to gulps of the farthest down horror,
It sails me . . . . I dab with bare feet . . . . they are licked by the indolent waves,
I am exposed . . . . cut by bitter and poisoned hail,
Steeped amid honeyed morphine . . . . my windpipe squeezed in the fakes of death, Let up again to feel the puzzle of puzzles,
And that we call Being.
To be in any form, what is that?
If nothing lay more developed the quahaug and its callous shell were enough.
Mine is no callous shell,
I have instant conductors all over me whether I pass or stop, They seize every object and lead it harmlessly through me.
I merely stir, press, feel with my fingers, and am happy,
To touch my person to some one else’s is about as much as I can stand.
Is this then a touch? . . . . quivering me to a new identity,
Flames and ether making a rush for my veins,
Treacherous tip of me reaching and crowding to help them,
My flesh and blood playing out lightning, to strike what is hardly different from myself, On all sides prurient provokers stiffening my limbs,
Straining the udder of my heart for its withheld drip,
Behaving licentious toward me, taking no denial,
Depriving me of my best as for a purpose,
Unbuttoning my clothes and holding me by the bare waist,
Deluding my confusion with the calm of the sunlight and pasture fields, Immodestly sliding the fellow-senses away,
They bribed to swap off with touch, and go and graze at the edges of me, No consideration, no regard for my draining strength or my anger, Fetching the rest of the herd around to enjoy them awhile,
Then all uniting to stand on a headland and worry me.
The sentries desert every other part of me,
They have left me helpless to a red marauder,
They all come to the headland to witness and assist against me.
I am given up by traitors;
I talk wildly . . . . I have lost my wits . . . . I and nobody else am the greatest traitor, I went myself first to the headland . . . . my own hands carried me there.
You villain touch! what are you doing? . . . . my breath is tight in its throat; Unclench your floodgates! you are too much for me.
Blind loving wrestling touch! Sheathed hooded sharptoothed touch! Did it make you ache so leaving me?


Parting tracked by arriving . . . . perpetual payment of the perpetual loan, Rich showering rain, and recompense richer afterward.
Sprouts take and accumulate . . . . stand by the curb prolific and vital, Landscapes projected masculine full-sized and golden.
All truths wait in all things,
They neither hasten their own delivery nor resist it, They do not need the obstetric forceps of the surgeon, The insignificant is as big to me as any,
What is less or more than a touch?
Logic and sermons never convince,
The damp of the night drives deeper into my soul.
Only what proves itself to every man and woman is so, Only what nobody denies is so.
A minute and a drop of me settle my brain;
I believe the soggy clods shall become lovers and lamps,
And a compend of compends is the meat of a man or woman,
And a summit and flower there is the feeling they have for each other,
And they are to branch boundlessly out of that lesson until it becomes omnific, And until every one shall delight us, and we them.
I believe a leaf of grass is no less than the journeywork of the stars,
And the pismire is equally perfect, and a grain of sand, and the egg of the wren,
And the tree-toad is a chef-d’ouvre for the highest,
And the running blackberry would adorn the parlors of heaven,
And the narrowest hinge in my hand puts to scorn all machinery,
And the cow crunching with depressed head surpasses any statue,
And a mouse is miracle enough to stagger sextillions of infidels,
And I could come every afternoon of my life to look at the farmer’s girl boiling her iron
tea-kettle and baking shortcake.
I find I incorporate gneiss and coal and long-threaded moss and fruits and grains and esculent roots,
And am stucco’d with quadrupeds and birds all over, And have distanced what is behind me for good reasons, And call any thing close again when I desire it.
In vain the speeding or shyness,
In vain the plutonic rocks send their old heat against my approach, In vain the mastadon retreats beneath its own powdered bones,
In vain objects stand leagues off and assume manifold shapes,
In vain the ocean settling in hollows and the great monsters lying low, In vain the buzzard houses herself with the sky,


In vain the snake slides through the creepers and logs,
In vain the elk takes to the inner passes of the woods,
In vain the razorbilled auk sails far north to Labrador,
I follow quickly . . . . I ascend to the nest in the fissure of the cliff.
I think I could turn and live awhile with the animals . . . . they are so placid and self- contained,
I stand and look at them sometimes half the day long.
They do not sweat and whine about their condition,
They do not lie awake in the dark and weep for their sins,
They do not make me sick discussing their duty to God,
Not one is dissatisfied . . . . not one is demented with the mania of owning things, Not one kneels to another nor to his kind that lived thousands of years ago,
Not one is respectable or industrious over the whole earth.
So they show their relations to me and I accept them;
They bring me tokens of myself . . . . they evince them plainly in their possession.
I do not know where they got those tokens,
I must have passed that way untold times ago and negligently dropt them, Myself moving forward then and now and forever,
Gathering and showing more always and with velocity,
Infinite and omnigenous and the like of these among them;
Not too exclusive toward the reachers of my remembrancers,
Picking out here one that shall be my amie,
Choosing to go with him on brotherly terms.
A gigantic beauty of a stallion, fresh and responsive to my caresses,
Head high in the forehead and wide between the ears,
Limbs glossy and supple, tail dusting the ground,
Eyes well apart and full of sparkling wickedness . . . . ears finely cut and flexibly moving.
His nostrils dilate . . . . my heels embrace him . . . . his well built limbs tremble with pleasure . . . . we speed around and return.
I but use you a moment and then I resign you stallion . . . . and do not need your paces, and outgallop them,
And myself as I stand or sit pass faster than you.
Swift wind! Space! My Soul! Now I know it is true what I guessed at;
What I guessed when I loafed on the grass,
What I guessed while I lay alone in my bed . . . . and again as I walked the beach under the
paling stars of the morning.
My ties and ballasts leave me . . . . I travel . . . . I sail . . . . my elbows rest in the sea-gaps, I skirt the sierras . . . . my palms cover continents,


I am afoot with my vision.
By the city’s quadrangular houses . . . . in log-huts, or camping with lumbermen, Along the ruts of the turnpike . . . . along the dry gulch and rivulet bed,
Hoeing my onion-patch, and rows of carrots and parsnips . . . . crossing savannas . . . .
trailing in forests,
Prospecting . . . . gold-digging . . . . girdling the trees of a new purchase,
Scorched ankle-deep by the hot sand . . . . hauling my boat down the shallow river; Where the panther walks to and fro on a limb overhead . . . . where the buck turns
furiously at the hunter,
Where the rattlesnake suns his flabby length on a rock . . . . where the otter is feeding on
fish,
Where the alligator in his tough pimples sleeps by the bayou,
Where the black bear is searching for roots or honey . . . . where the beaver pats the mud
with his paddle-tail;
Over the growing sugar . . . . over the cottonplant . . . . over the rice in its low moist field; Over the sharp-peaked farmhouse with its scalloped scum and slender shoots from the
gutters;
Over the western persimmon . . . . over the longleaved corn and the delicate blueflowered
flax;
Over the white and brown buckwheat, a hummer and a buzzer there with the rest,
Over the dusky green of the rye as it ripples and shades in the breeze;
Scaling mountains . . . . pulling myself cautiously up . . . . holding on by low scragged limbs, Walking the path worn in the grass and beat through the leaves of the brush;
Where the quail is whistling betwixt the woods and the wheatlot,
Where the bat flies in the July eve . . . . where the great goldbug drops through the dark; Where the flails keep time on the barn floor,
Where the brook puts out of the roots of the old tree and flows to the meadow,
Where cattle stand and shake away flies with the tremulous shuddering of their hides, Where the cheese-cloth hangs in the kitchen, and andirons straddle the hearth-slab, and
cobwebs fall in festoons from the rafters;
Where triphammers crash . . . . where the press is whirling its cylinders;
Wherever the human heart beats with terrible throes out of its ribs;
Where the pear-shaped balloon is floating aloft . . . . floating in it myself and looking
composedly down;
Where the life-car is drawn on the slipnoose . . . . where the heat hatches pale-green eggs in
the dented sand,
Where the she-whale swims with her calves and never forsakes them,
Where the steamship trails hindways its long pennant of smoke,
Where the ground-shark’s fin cuts like a black chip out of the water,
Where the half-burned brig is riding on unknown currents,
Where shells grow to her slimy deck, and the dead are corrupting below; Where the striped and starred flag is borne at the head of the regiments; Approaching Manhattan, up by the long-stretching island,
Under Niagara, the cataract falling like a veil over my countenance;
Upon a door-step . . . . upon the horse-block of hard wood outside,
Upon the race-course, or enjoying pic-nics or jigs or a good game of base-ball,


At he-festivals with blackguard jibes and ironical license and bull-dances and drinking and laughter,
At the cider-mill, tasting the sweet of the brown sqush . . . . sucking the juice through a straw,
At apple-pealings, wanting kisses for all the red fruit I find,
At musters and beach-parties and friendly bees and huskings and house-raisings;
Where the mockingbird sounds his delicious gurgles, and cackles and screams and weeps, Where the hay-rick stands in the barnyard, and the dry-stalks are scattered, and the brood
cow waits in the hovel,
Where the bull advances to do his masculine work, and the stud to the mare, and the cock
is treading the hen,
Where the heifers browse, and the geese nip their food with short jerks;
Where the sundown shadows lengthen over the limitless and lonesome prairie,
Where the herds of buffalo make a crawling spread of the square miles far and near; Where the hummingbird shimmers . . . . where the neck of the longlived swan is curving
and winding;
Where the laughing-gull scoots by the slappy shore and laughs her near-human laugh; Where beehives range on a gray bench in the garden half-hid by the high weeds;
Where the band-necked partridges roost in a ring on the ground with their heads out; Where burial coaches enter the arched gates of a cemetery;
Where winter wolves bark amid wastes of snow and icicled trees;
Where the yellow-crowned heron comes to the edge of the marsh at night and feeds upon
small crabs;
Where the splash of swimmers and divers cools the warm noon;
Where the katydid works her chromatic reed on the walnut-tree over the well; Through patches of citrons and cucumbers with silver-wired leaves,
Through the salt-lick or orange glade . . . . or under conical firs;
Through the gymnasium . . . . through the curtained saloon . . . . through the office or
public hall;
Pleased with the native and pleased with the foreign . . . . pleased with the new and old, Pleased with women, the homely as well as the handsome,
Pleased with the quakeress as she puts off her bonnet and talks melodiously,
Pleased with the primitive tunes of the choir of the whitewashed church,
Pleased with the earnest words of the sweating Methodist preacher, or any preacher . . . .
looking seriously at the camp-meeting;
Looking in at the shop-windows in Broadway the whole forenoon . . . . pressing the flesh of
my nose to the thick plate-glass,
Wandering the same afternoon with my face turned up to the clouds;
My right and left arms round the sides of two friends and I in the middle;
Coming home with the bearded and dark-cheeked bush-boy . . . . riding behind him at the
drape of the day;
Far from the settlements studying the print of animals’ feet, or the moccasin print; By the cot in the hospital reaching lemonade to a feverish patient,
By the coffined corpse when all is still, examining with a candle;
Voyaging to every port to dicker and adventure;
Hurrying with the modern crowd, as eager and fickle as any,
Hot toward one I hate, ready in my madness to knife him;


Solitary at midnight in my back yard, my thoughts gone from me a long while,
Walking the old hills of Judea with the beautiful gentle god by my side;
Speeding through space . . . . speeding through heaven and the stars,
Speeding amid the seven satellites and the broad ring and the diameter of eighty thousand
miles,
Speeding with tailed meteors . . . . throwing fire-balls like the rest, Carrying the crescent child that carries its own full mother in its belly; Storming enjoying planning loving cautioning,
Backing and filling, appearing and disappearing,
I tread day and night such roads.
I visit the orchards of God and look at the spheric product, And look at quintillions ripened, and look at quintillions green.
I fly the flight of the fluid and swallowing soul,
My course runs below the soundings of plummets.
I help myself to material and immaterial,
No guard can shut me off, no law can prevent me.
I anchor my ship for a little while only,
My messengers continually cruise away or bring their returns to me.
I go hunting polar furs and the seal . . . . leaping chasms with a pike-pointed staff . . . .
clinging to topples of brittle and blue.
I ascend to the foretruck . . . . I take my place late at night in the crow’s nest . . . . we sail through the arctic sea . . . . it is plenty light enough,
Through the clear atmosphere I stretch around on the wonderful beauty,
The enormous masses of ice pass me and I pass them . . . . the scenery is plain in all
directions,
The white-topped mountains point up in the distance . . . . I fling out my fancies toward
them;
We are about approaching some great battlefield in which we are soon to be engaged,
We pass the colossal outposts of the encampments . . . . we pass with still feet and caution; Or we are entering by the suburbs some vast and ruined city . . . . the blocks and fallen architecture more than all the living cities of the globe.
I am a free companion . . . . I bivouac by invading watchfires.
I turn the bridegroom out of bed and stay with the bride myself, And tighten her all night to my thighs and lips.
My voice is the wife’s voice, the screech by the rail of the stairs, They fetch my man’s body up dripping and drowned.
I understand the large hearts of heroes, The courage of present times and all times;


How the skipper saw the crowded and rudderless wreck of the steamship, and death chasing it up and down the storm,
How he knuckled tight and gave not back one inch, and was faithful of days and faithful of nights,
And chalked in large letters on a board, Be of good cheer, We will not desert you;
How he saved the drifting company at last,
How the lank loose-gowned women looked when boated from the side of their prepared
graves,
How the silent old-faced infants, and the lifted sick, and the sharp-lipped unshaved men; All this I swallow and it tastes good . . . . I like it well, and it becomes mine,
I am the man . . . . I suffered . . . . I was there.
The disdain and calmness of martyrs,
The mother condemned for a witch and burnt with dry wood, and her children gazing on; The hounded slave that flags in the race and leans by the fence, blowing and covered with
sweat,
The twinges that sting like needles his legs and neck, The murderous buckshot and the bullets,
All these I feel or am.
I am the hounded slave . . . . I wince at the bite of the dogs,
Hell and despair are upon me . . . . crack and again crack the marksmen,
I clutch the rails of the fence . . . . my gore dribs thinned with the ooze of my skin,
I fall on the weeds and stones,
The riders spur their unwilling horses and haul close,
They taunt my dizzy ears . . . . they beat me violently over the head with their whip-stocks.
Agonies are one of my changes of garments;
I do not ask the wounded person how he feels . . . . I myself become the wounded person, My hurt turns livid upon me as I lean on a cane and observe.
I am the mashed fireman with breastbone broken . . . . tumbling walls buried me in their debris,
Heat and smoke I inspired . . . . I heard the yelling shouts of my comrades, I heard the distant click of their picks and shovels;
They have cleared the beams away . . . . they tenderly lift me forth.
I lie in the night air in my red shirt . . . . the pervading hush is for my sake,
Painless after all I lie, exhausted but not so unhappy,
White and beautiful are the faces around me . . . . the heads are bared of their fire-caps, The kneeling crowd fades with the light of the torches.
Distant and dead resuscitate,
They show as the dial or move as the hands of me . . . . and I am the clock myself.
I am an old artillerist, and tell of some fort’s bombardment . . . . and am there again.


Again the reveille of drummers . . . . again the attacking cannon and mortars and howitzers, Again the attacked send their cannon responsive.
I take part . . . . I see and hear the whole,
The cries and curses and roar . . . . the plaudits for well aimed shots,
The ambulanza slowly passing and trailing its red drip,
Workmen searching after damages and to make indispensible repairs,
The fall of grenades through the rent roof . . . . the fan-shaped explosion,
The whizz of limbs heads stone wood and iron high in the air.
Again gurgles the mouth of my dying general . . . . he furiously waves with his hand, He gasps through the clot . . . . Mind not me . . . . mind . . . . the entrenchments.
I tell not the fall of Alamo . . . . not one escaped to tell the fall of Alamo, The hundred and fifty are dumb yet at Alamo.
Hear now the tale of a jetblack sunrise,
Hear of the murder in cold blood of four hundred and twelve young men.
Retreating they had formed in a hollow square with their baggage for breastworks,
Nine hundred lives out of the surrounding enemy’s nine times their number was the price
they took in advance,
Their colonel was wounded and their ammunition gone,
They treated for an honorable capitulation, received writing and seal, gave up their arms,
and marched back prisoners of war.
They were the glory of the race of rangers,
Matchless with a horse, a rifle, a song, a supper or a courtship,
Large, turbulent, brave, handsome, generous, proud and affectionate, Bearded, sunburnt, dressed in the free costume of hunters,
Not a single one over thirty years of age.
The second Sunday morning they were brought out in squads and massacred . . . . it was beautiful early summer,
The work commenced about five o’clock and was over by eight.
None obeyed the command to kneel,
Some made a mad and helpless rush . . . . some stood stark and straight,
A few fell at once, shot in the temple or heart . . . . the living and dead lay together, The maimed and mangled dug in the dirt . . . . the new-comers saw them there; Some half-killed attempted to crawl away,
These were dispatched with bayonets or battered with the blunts of muskets;
A youth not seventeen years old seized his assassin till two more came to release him, The three were all torn, and covered with the boy’s blood.
At eleven o’clock began the burning of the bodies;
And that is the tale of the murder of the four hundred and twelve young men, And that was a jetblack sunrise.


Did you read in the seabooks of the oldfashioned frigate-fight? Did you learn who won by the light of the moon and stars?
Our foe was no skulk in his ship, I tell you,
His was the English pluck, and there is no tougher or truer, and never was, and never will
be;
Along the lowered eve he came, horribly raking us.
We closed with him . . . . the yards entangled . . . . the cannon touched, My captain lashed fast with his own hands.
We had received some eighteen-pound shots under the water,
On our lower-gun-deck two large pieces had burst at the first fire, killing all around and
blowing up overhead.
Ten o’clock at night, and the full moon shining and the leaks on the gain, and five feet of water reported,
The master-at-arms loosing the prisoners confined in the after-hold to give them a chance for themselves.
The transit to and from the magazine was now stopped by the sentinels, They saw so many strange faces they did not know whom to trust.
Our frigate was afire . . . . the other asked if we demanded quarters? if our colors were struck and the fighting done?
I laughed content when I heard the voice of my little captain,
We have not struck, he composedly cried, We have just begun our part of the fighting.
Only three guns were in use,
One was directed by the captain himself against the enemy’s mainmast,
Two well-served with grape and canister silenced his musketry and cleared his decks.
The tops alone seconded the fire of this little battery, especially the maintop, They all held out bravely during the whole of the action.
Not a moment’s cease,
The leaks gained fast on the pumps . . . . the fire eat toward the powder-magazine, One of the pumps was shot away . . . . it was generally thought we were sinking.
Serene stood the little captain,
He was not hurried . . . . his voice was neither high nor low, His eyes gave more light to us than our battle-lanterns.
Toward twelve at night, there in the beams of the moon they surrendered to us.


Stretched and still lay the midnight,
Two great hulls motionless on the breast of the darkness,
Our vessel riddled and slowly sinking . . . . preparations to pass to the one we had
conquered,
The captain on the quarter deck coldly giving his orders through a countenance white as a
sheet,
Near by the corpse of the child that served in the cabin,
The dead face of an old salt with long white hair and carefully curled whiskers,
The flames spite of all that could be done flickering aloft and below,
The husky voices of the two or three officers yet fit for duty,
Formless stacks of bodies and bodies by themselves . . . . dabs of flesh upon the masts and
spars,
The cut of cordage and dangle of rigging . . . . the slight shock of the soothe of waves, Black and impassive guns, and litter of powder-parcels, and the strong scent,
Delicate sniffs of the seabreeze . . . . smells of sedgy grass and fields by the shore . . . .
death-messages given in charge to survivors,
The hiss of the surgeon’s knife and the gnawing teeth of his saw,
The wheeze, the cluck, the swash of falling blood . . . . the short wild scream, the long dull
tapering groan,
These so . . . . these irretrievable.
O Christ! My fit is mastering me!
What the rebel said gaily adjusting his throat to the rope-noose,
What the savage at the stump, his eye-sockets empty, his mouth spirting whoops and
defiance,
What stills the traveler come to the vault at Mount Vernon,
What sobers the Brooklyn boy as he looks down the shores of the Wallabout and
remembers the prison ships,
What burnt the gums of the redcoat at Saratoga when he surrendered his brigades, These become mine and me every one, and they are but little,
I become as much more as I like.
I become any presence or truth of humanity here, And see myself in prison shaped like another man, And feel the dull unintermitted pain.
For me the keepers of convicts shoulder their carbines and keep watch, It is I let out in the morning and barred at night.
Not a mutineer walks handcuffed to the jail, but I am handcuffed to him and walk by his side,
I am less the jolly one there, and more the silent one with sweat on my twitching lips. Not a youngster is taken for larceny, but I go up too and am tried and sentenced.
Not a cholera patient lies at the last gasp, but I also lie at the last gasp,
My face is ash-colored, my sinews gnarl . . . . away from me people retreat.


Askers embody themselves in me, and I am embodied in them, I project my hat and sit shamefaced and beg.
I rise extatic through all, and sweep with the true gravitation, The whirling and whirling is elemental within me.
Somehow I have been stunned. Stand back!
Give me a little time beyond my cuffed head and slumbers and dreams and gaping, I discover myself on a verge of the usual mistake.
That I could forget the mockers and insults!
That I could forget the trickling tears and the blows of the bludgeons and hammers! That I could look with a separate look on my own crucifixion and bloody crowning!
I remember . . . . I resume the overstaid fraction,
The grave of rock multiplies what has been confided to it . . . . or to any graves, The corpses rise . . . . the gashes heal . . . . the fastenings roll away.
I troop forth replenished with supreme power, one of an average unending procession, We walk the roads of Ohio and Massachusetts and Virginia and Wisconsin and New York
and New Orleans and Texas and Montreal and San Francisco and Charleston and
Savannah and Mexico,
Inland and by the seacoast and boundary lines . . . . and we pass the boundary lines.
Our swift ordinances are on their way over the whole earth,
The blossoms we wear in our hats are the growth of two thousand years.
Eleves I salute you,
I see the approach of your numberless gangs . . . . I see you understand yourselves and me, And know that they who have eyes are divine, and the blind and lame are equally divine, And that my steps drag behind yours yet go before them,
And are aware how I am with you no more than I am with everybody.
The friendly and flowing savage . . . . Who is he?
Is he waiting for civilization or past it and mastering it?
Is he some southwesterner raised outdoors? Is he Canadian?
Is he from the Mississippi country? or from Iowa, Oregon or California? or from the mountains? or prairie life or bush-life? or from the sea?
Wherever he goes men and women accept and desire him,
They desire he should like them and touch them and speak to them and stay with them.
Behaviour lawless as snow-flakes . . . . words simple as grass . . . . uncombed head and laughter and naivete;
Slowstepping feet and the common features, and the common modes and emanations,


They descend in new forms from the tips of his fingers,
They are wafted with the odor of his body or breath . . . . they fly out of the glance of his
eyes.
Flaunt of the sunshine I need not your bask . . . . lie over,
You light surfaces only . . . . I force the surfaces and the depths also.
Earth! you seem to look for something at my hands, Say old topknot! what do you want?
Man or woman! I might tell how I like you, but cannot,
And might tell what it is in me and what it is in you, but cannot,
And might tell the pinings I have . . . . the pulse of my nights and days.
Behold I do not give lectures or a little charity, What I give I give out of myself.
You there, impotent, loose in the knees, open your scarfed chops till I blow grit within you, Spread your palms and lift the flaps of your pockets,
I am not to be denied . . . . I compel . . . . I have stores plenty and to spare,
And any thing I have I bestow.
I do not ask who you are . . . . that is not important to me, You can do nothing and be nothing but what I will infold you.
To a drudge of the cottonfields or emptier of privies I lean . . . . on his right cheek I put the family kiss,
And in my soul I swear I never will deny him.
On women fit for conception I start bigger and nimbler babes, This day I am jetting the stuff of far more arrogant republics.
To any one dying . . . . thither I speed and twist the knob of the door, Turn the bedclothes toward the foot of the bed,
Let the physician and the priest go home.
I seize the descending man . . . . I raise him with resistless will.
O despairer, here is my neck,
By God! you shall not go down! Hang your whole weight upon me.
I dilate you with tremendous breath . . . . I buoy you up;
Every room of the house do I fill with an armed force . . . . lovers of me, bafflers of graves: Sleep! I and they keep guard all night;
Not doubt, not decease shall dare to lay finger upon you,
I have embraced you, and henceforth possess you to myself,
And when you rise in the morning you will find what I tell you is so.


I am he bringing help for the sick as they pant on their backs, And for strong upright men I bring yet more needed help.
I heard what was said of the universe,
Heard it and heard of several thousand years;
It is middling well as far as it goes . . . . but is that all?
Magnifying and applying come I,
Outbidding at the start the old cautious hucksters,
The most they offer for mankind and eternity less than a spirt of my own seminal wet, Taking myself the exact dimensions of Jehovah and laying them away,
Lithographing Kronos and Zeus his son, and Hercules his grandson,
Buying drafts of Osiris and Isis and Belus and Brahma and Adonai,
In my portfolio placing Manito loose, and Allah on a leaf, and the crucifix engraved,
With Odin, and the hideous-faced Mexitli, and all idols and images,
Honestly taking them all for what they are worth, and not a cent more,
Admitting they were alive and did the work of their day,
Admitting they bore mites as for unfledged birds who have now to rise and fly and sing for
themselves,
Accepting the rough deific sketches to fill out better in myself . . . . bestowing them freely
on each man and woman I see,
Discovering as much or more in a framer framing a house,
Putting higher claims for him there with his rolled-up sleeves, driving the mallet and chisel; Not objecting to special revelations . . . . considering a curl of smoke or a hair on the back
of my hand as curious as any revelation;
Those ahold of fire-engines and hook-and-ladder ropes more to me than the gods of the
antique wars,
Minding their voices peal through the crash of destruction,
Their brawny limbs passing safe over charred laths . . . . their white foreheads whole and
unhurt out of the flames;
By the mechanic’s wife with her babe at her nipple interceding for every person born; Three scythes at harvest whizzing in a row from three lusty angels with shirts bagged out at
their waists;
The snag-toothed hostler with red hair redeeming sins past and to come,
Selling all he possesses and traveling on foot to fee lawyers for his brother and sit by him
while he is tried for forgery:
What was strewn in the amplest strewing the square rod about me, and not filling the
square rod then;
The bull and the bug never worshipped half enough,
Dung and dirt more admirable than was dreamed,
The supernatural of no account . . . . myself waiting my time to be one of the supremes, The day getting ready for me when I shall do as much good as the best, and be as
prodigious,
Guessing when I am it will not tickle me much to receive puffs out of pulpit or print; By my life-lumps! becoming already a creator!
Putting myself here and now to the ambushed womb of the shadows!


. . . . A call in the midst of the crowd,
My own voice, orotund sweeping and final.
Come my children,
Come my boys and girls, and my women and household and intimates,
Now the performer launches his nerve . . . . he has passed his prelude on the reeds within.
Easily written loosefingered chords! I feel the thrum of their climax and close.
My head evolves on my neck,
Music rolls, but not from the organ . . . . folks are around me, but they are no household of
mine.
Ever the hard and unsunk ground,
Ever the eaters and drinkers . . . . ever the upward and downward sun . . . . ever the air and
the ceaseless tides,
Ever myself and my neighbors, refreshing and wicked and real,
Ever the old inexplicable query . . . . ever that thorned thumb—that breath of itches and
thirsts,
Ever the vexer’s hoot! hoot! till we find where the sly one hides and bring him forth; Ever love . . . . ever the sobbing liquid of life,
Ever the bandage under the chin . . . . ever the tressels of death.
Here and there with dimes on the eyes walking,
To feed the greed of the belly the brains liberally spooning,
Tickets buying or taking or selling, but in to the feast never once going;
Many sweating and ploughing and thrashing, and then the chaff for payment receiving, A few idly owning, and they the wheat continually claiming.
This is the city . . . . and I am one of the citizens;
Whatever interests the rest interests me . . . . politics, churches, newspapers, schools, Benevolent societies, improvements, banks, tariffs, steamships, factories, markets, Stocks and stores and real estate and personal estate.
They who piddle and patter here in collars and tailed coats . . . . I am aware who they are . . . . and that they are not worms or fleas,
I acknowledge the duplicates of myself under all the scrape-lipped and pipe-legged concealments.
The weakest and shallowest is deathless with me,
What I do and say the same waits for them,
Every thought that flounders in me the same flounders in them.
I know perfectly well my own egotism,
And know my omniverous words, and cannot say any less, And would fetch you whoever you are flush with myself.


My words are words of a questioning, and to indicate reality;
This printed and bound book . . . . but the printer and the printing-office boy?
The marriage estate and settlement . . . . but the body and mind of the bridegroom? also
those of the bride?
The panorama of the sea . . . . but the sea itself?
The well-taken photographs . . . . but your wife or friend close and solid in your arms?
The fleet of ships of the line and all the modern improvements . . . . but the craft and pluck
of the admiral?
The dishes and fare and furniture . . . . but the host and hostess, and the look out of their eyes?
The sky up there . . . . yet here or next door or across the way?
The saints and sages in history . . . . but you yourself?
Sermons and creeds and theology . . . . but the human brain, and what is called reason, and what is called love, and what is called life?
I do not despise you priests;
My faith is the greatest of faiths and the least of faiths,
Enclosing all worship ancient and modern, and all between ancient and modern, Believing I shall come again upon the earth after five thousand years,
Waiting responses from oracles . . . . honoring the gods . . . . saluting the sun,
Making a fetish of the first rock or stump . . . . powowing with sticks in the circle of obis, Helping the lama or brahmin as he trims the lamps of the idols,
Dancing yet through the streets in a phallic procession . . . . rapt and austere in the woods,
a gymnosophist,
Drinking mead from the skull-cup . . . . to shasta and vedas admirant . . . . minding the
koran,
Walking the teokallis, spotted with gore from the stone and knife—beating the serpent-skin
drum;
Accepting the gospels, accepting him that was crucified, knowing assuredly that he is divine, To the mass kneeling—to the puritan’s prayer rising—sitting patiently in a pew,
Ranting and frothing in my insane crisis—waiting dead-like till my spirit arouses me; Looking forth on pavement and land, and outside of pavement and land,
Belonging to the winders of the circuit of circuits.
One of that centripetal and centrifugal gang,
I turn and talk like a man leaving charges before a journey.
Down-hearted doubters, dull and excluded,
Frivolous sullen moping angry affected disheartened atheistical,
I know every one of you, and know the unspoken interrogatories, By experience I know them.
How the flukes splash!
How they contort rapid as lightning, with spasms and spouts of blood!
Be at peace bloody flukes of doubters and sullen mopers,


I take my place among you as much as among any;
The past is the push of you and me and all precisely the same, And the night is for you and me and all,
And what is yet untried and afterward is for you and me and all.
I do not know what is untried and afterward, But I know it is sure and alive, and sufficient.
Each who passes is considered, and each who stops is considered, and not a single one can it fail.
It cannot fail the young man who died and was buried,
Nor the young woman who died and was put by his side,
Nor the little child that peeped in at the door and then drew back and was never seen
again,
Nor the old man who has lived without purpose, and feels it with bitterness worse than gall, Nor him in the poorhouse tubercled by rum and the bad disorder,
Nor the numberless slaughtered and wrecked . . . . nor the brutish koboo, called the
ordure of humanity,
Nor the sacs merely floating with open mouths for food to slip in,
Nor any thing in the earth, or down in the oldest graves of the earth,
Nor any thing in the myriads of spheres, nor one of the myriads of myriads that inhabit
them,
Nor the present, nor the least wisp that is known.
It is time to explain myself . . . . let us stand up.
What is known I strip away . . . . I launch all men and women forward with me into the unknown.
The clock indicates the moment . . . . but what does eternity indicate?
Eternity lies in bottomless reservoirs . . . . its buckets are rising forever and ever, They pour and they pour and they exhale away.
We have thus far exhausted trillions of winters and summers; There are trillions ahead, and trillions ahead of them.
Births have brought us richness and variety,
And other births will bring us richness and variety.
I do not call one greater and one smaller,
That which fills its period and place is equal to any.
Were mankind murderous or jealous upon you my brother or my sister? I am sorry for you . . . . they are not murderous or jealous upon me;
All has been gentle with me . . . . . . I keep no account with lamentation;


What have I to do with lamentation?
I am an acme of things accomplished, and I an encloser of things to be.
My feet strike an apex of the apices of the stairs,
On every step bunches of ages, and larger bunches between the steps, All below duly traveled—and still I mount and mount.
Rise after rise bow the phantoms behind me,
Afar down I see the huge first Nothing, the vapor from the nostrils of death, I know I was even there . . . . I waited unseen and always,
And slept while God carried me through the lethargic mist,
And took my time . . . . and took no hurt from the foetid carbon.
Long I was hugged close . . . . long and long.
Immense have been the preparations for me, Faithful and friendly the arms that have helped me.
Cycles ferried my cradle, rowing and rowing like cheerful boatmen; For room to me stars kept aside in their own rings,
They sent influences to look after what was to hold me.
Before I was born out of my mother generations guided me,
My embryo has never been torpid . . . . nothing could overlay it;
For it the nebula cohered to an orb . . . . the long slow strata piled to rest it on . . . . vast
vegetables gave it sustenance,
Monstrous sauroids transported it in their mouths and deposited it with care.
All forces have been steadily employed to complete and delight me, Now I stand on this spot with my soul.
Span of youth! Ever-pushed elasticity! Manhood balanced and florid and full!
My lovers suffocate me!
Crowding my lips, and thick in the pores of my skin,
Jostling me through streets and public halls . . . . coming naked to me at night,
Crying by day Ahoy from the rocks of the river . . . . swinging and chirping over my head, Calling my name from flowerbeds or vines or tangled underbrush,
Or while I swim in the bath . . . . or drink from the pump
at the corner . . . . or the curtain is down at the opera . . . . or I glimpse at a
woman’s face in the railroad car;
Lighting on every moment of my life,
Bussing my body with soft and balsamic busses,
Noiselessly passing handfuls out of their hearts and giving them to be mine.
Old age superbly rising! Ineffable grace of dying days!


Every condition promulges not only itself . . . . it promulges what grows after and out of itself,
And the dark hush promulges as much as any.
I open my scuttle at night and see the far-sprinkled systems,
And all I see, multiplied as high as I can cipher, edge but the rim of the farther systems. Wider and wider they spread, expanding and always expanding,
Outward and outward and forever outward.
My sun has his sun, and round him obediently wheels,
He joins with his partners a group of superior circuit,
And greater sets follow, making specks of the greatest inside them.
There is no stoppage, and never can be stoppage;
If I and you and the worlds and all beneath or upon their surfaces, and all the palpable life,
were this moment reduced back to a pallid float, it would not avail in the long run, We should surely bring up again where we now stand,
And as surely go as much farther, and then farther and farther.
A few quadrillions of eras, a few octillions of cubic leagues, do not hazard the span, or make it impatient,
They are but parts . . . . any thing is but a part.
See ever so far . . . . there is limitless space outside of that, Count ever so much . . . . there is limitless time around that.
Our rendezvous is fitly appointed . . . . God will be there and wait till we come.
I know I have the best of time and space—and that I was never measured, and never will be measured.
I tramp a perpetual journey,
My signs are a rain-proof coat and good shoes and a staff cut from the woods; No friend of mine takes his ease in my chair,
I have no chair, nor church nor philosophy;
I lead no man to a dinner-table or library or exchange,
But each man and each woman of you I lead upon a knoll,
My left hand hooks you round the waist,
My right hand points to landscapes of continents, and a plain public road.
Not I, not any one else can travel that road for you, You must travel it for yourself.
It is not far . . . . it is within reach,
Perhaps you have been on it since you were born, and did not know, Perhaps it is every where on water and on land.


Shoulder your duds, and I will mine, and let us hasten forth; Wonderful cities and free nations we shall fetch as we go.
If you tire, give me both burdens, and rest the chuff of your hand on my hip, And in due time you shall repay the same service to me;
For after we start we never lie by again.
This day before dawn I ascended a hill and looked at the crowded heaven,
And I said to my spirit, When we become the enfolders of those orbs and the pleasure and
knowledge of every thing in them, shall we be filled and satisfied then? And my spirit said No, we level that lift to pass and continue beyond.
You are also asking me questions, and I hear you;
I answer that I cannot answer . . . . you must find out for yourself.
Sit awhile wayfarer,
Here are biscuits to eat and here is milk to drink,
But as soon as you sleep and renew yourself in sweet clothes I will certainly kiss you with
my goodbye kiss and open the gate for your egress hence.
Long enough have you dreamed contemptible dreams,
Now I wash the gum from your eyes,
You must habit yourself to the dazzle of the light and of every moment of your life
Long have you timidly waded, holding a plank by the shore,
Now I will you to be a bold swimmer,
To jump off in the midst of the sea, and rise again and nod to me and shout, and
laughingly dash with your hair.
I am the teacher of athletes,
He that by me spreads a wider breast than my own proves the width of my own, He most honors my style who learns under it to destroy the teacher.
The boy I love, the same becomes a man not through derived power but in his own right, Wicked, rather than virtuous out of conformity or fear,
Fond of his sweetheart, relishing well his steak,
Unrequited love or a slight cutting him worse than a wound cuts,
First rate to ride, to fight, to hit the bull’s eye, to sail a skiff, to sing a song or play on the banjo,
Preferring scars and faces pitted with smallpox over all latherers and those that keep out of the sun.
I teach straying from me, yet who can stray from me? I follow you whoever you are from the present hour; My words itch at your ears till you understand them.


I do not say these things for a dollar, or to fill up the time while I wait for a boat; It is you talking just as much as myself . . . . I act as the tongue of you,
It was tied in your mouth . . . . in mine it begins to be loosened.
I swear I will never mention love or death inside a house,
And I swear I never will translate myself at all, only to him or her who privately stays with
me in the open air.
If you would understand me go to the heights or water-shore,
The nearest gnat is an explanation and a drop or the motion of waves a key, The maul the oar and the handsaw second my words.
No shuttered room or school can commune with me, But roughs and little children better than they.
The young mechanic is closest to me . . . . he knows me pretty well,
The woodman that takes his axe and jug with him shall take me with him all day,
The farmboy ploughing in the field feels good at the sound of my voice,
In vessels that sail my words must sail . . . . I go with fishermen and seamen, and love them, My face rubs to the hunter’s face when he lies down alone in his blanket,
The driver thinking of me does not mind the jolt of his wagon,
The young mother and old mother shall comprehend me,
The girl and the wife rest the needle a moment and forget where they are,
They and all would resume what I have told them.
I have said that the soul is not more than the body,
And I have said that the body is not more than the soul,
And nothing, not God, is greater to one than one’s-self is,
And whoever walks a furlong without sympathy walks to his own funeral, dressed in his
shroud,
And I or you pocketless of a dime may purchase the pick of the earth,
And to glance with an eye or show a bean in its pod confounds the learning of all times, And there is no trade or employment but the young man following it may become a hero, And there is no object so soft but it makes a hub for the wheeled universe,
And any man or woman shall stand cool and supercilious before a million universes.
And I call to mankind, Be not curious about God,
For I who am curious about each am not curious about God,
No array of terms can say how much I am at peace about God and about death. I hear and behold God in every object, yet I understand God not in the least, Nor do I understand who there can be more wonderful than myself.
Why should I wish to see God better than this day?
I see something of God each hour of the twenty-four, and each moment then,
In the faces of men and women I see God, and in my own face in the glass;
I find letters from God dropped in the street, and every one is signed by God’s name, And I leave them where they are, for I know that others will punctually come forever and


ever.
And as to you death, and you bitter hug of mortality . . . . it is idle to try to alarm me.
To his work without flinching the accoucheur comes,
I see the elderhand pressing receiving supporting,
I recline by the sills of the exquisite flexible doors . . . . and mark the outlet, and mark the
relief and escape.
And as to you corpse I think you are good manure, but that does not offend me, I smell the white roses sweetscented and growing,
I reach to the leafy lips . . . . I reach to the polished breasts of melons.
And as to you life, I reckon you are the leavings of many deaths, No doubt I have died myself ten thousand times before.
I hear you whispering there O stars of heaven,
O suns . . . . O grass of graves . . . . O perpetual transfers and promotions . . . . if you do
not say anything how can I say anything?
Of the turbid pool that lies in the autumn forest,
Of the moon that descends the steeps of the soughing twilight,
Toss, sparkles of day and dusk . . . . toss on the black stems that decay in the muck, Toss to the moaning gibberish of the dry limbs.
I ascend from the moon . . . . I ascend from the night,
And perceive of the ghastly glitter the sunbeams reflected,
And debouch to the steady and central from the offspring great or small.
There is that in me . . . . I do not know what it is . . . . but I know it is in me.
Wrenched and sweaty . . . . calm and cool then my body becomes; I sleep . . . . I sleep long.
I do not know it . . . . it is without name . . . . it is a word unsaid, It is not in any dictionary or utterance or symbol.
Something it swings on more than the earth I swing on,
To it the creation is the friend whose embracing awakes me.
Perhaps I might tell more . . . . Outlines! I plead for my brothers and sisters.
Do you see O my brothers and sisters?
It is not chaos or death . . . . it is form and union and plan . . . . it is eternal life . . . . it is
happiness.
The past and present wilt . . . . I have filled them and emptied them,


And proceed to fill my next fold of the future.
Listener up there! Here you . . . . what have you to confide to me?
Look in my face while I snuff the sidle of evening,
Talk honestly, for no one else hears you, and I stay only a minute longer.
Do I contradict myself?
Very well then . . . . I contradict myself; I am large . . . . I contain multitudes.
I concentrate toward them that are nigh . . . . I wait on the door-slab.
Who has done his day’s work and will soonest be through with his supper? Who wishes to walk with me?
Will you speak before I am gone? Will you prove already too late?
The spotted hawk swoops by and accuses me . . . . he complains of my gab and my loitering.
I too am not a bit tamed . . . . I too am untranslatable, I sound my barbaric yawp over the roofs of the world.
The last scud of day holds back for me,
It flings my likeness after the rest and true as any on the shadowed wilds, It coaxes me to the vapor and the dusk.
I depart as air . . . . I shake my white locks at the runaway sun, I effuse my flesh in eddies and drift it in lacy jags.
I bequeath myself to the dirt to grow from the grass I love,
If you want me again look for me under your bootsoles.
You will hardly know who I am or what I mean, But I shall be good health to you nevertheless, And filter and fibre your blood.
Failing to fetch me at first keep encouraged, Missing me one place search another,
I stop some where waiting for you


[A Song for Occupations]
Come closer to me,
Push close my lovers and take the best I possess,
Yield closer and closer and give me the best you possess.
This is unfinished business with me . . . . how is it with you?
I was chilled with the cold types and cylinder and wet paper between us.
I pass so poorly with paper and types . . . . I must pass with the contact of bodies and souls.
I do not thank you for liking me as I am, and liking the touch of me . . . . I know that it is good for you to do so.
Were all educations practical and ornamental well displayed out of me, what would it amount to?
Were I as the head teacher or charitable proprietor or wise statesman, what would it amount to?
Were I to you as the boss employing and paying you, would that satisfy you?
The learned and virtuous and benevolent, and the usual terms; A man like me, and never the usual terms.
Neither a servant nor a master am I,
I take no sooner a large price than a small price . . . . I will have my own whoever enjoys
me,
I will be even with you, and you shall be even with me.
If you are a workman or workwoman I stand as nigh as the nighest that works in the same shop,
If you bestow gifts on your brother or dearest friend, I demand as good as your brother or dearest friend,
If your lover or husband or wife is welcome by day or night, I must be personally as welcome;
If you have become degraded or ill, then I will become so for your sake;
If you remember your foolish and outlawed deeds, do you think I cannot remember my
foolish and outlawed deeds?
If you carouse at the table I say I will carouse at the opposite side of the table;
If you meet some stranger in the street and love him or her, do I not often meet strangers
in the street and love them?
If you see a good deal remarkable in me I see just as much remarkable in you.
Why what have you thought of yourself?
Is it you then that thought yourself less?
Is it you that thought the President greater than you? or the rich better off than you? or the


educated wiser than you?
Because you are greasy or pimpled—or that you was once drunk, or a thief, or diseased, or rheumatic, or a prostitute—or are so now—or from frivolity or impotence—or that you are no scholar, and never saw your name in print . . . . do you give in that you are any less immortal?
Souls of men and women! it is not you I call unseen, unheard, untouchable and untouching;
It is not you I go argue pro and con about, and to settle whether you are alive or no;
I own publicly who you are, if nobody else owns . . . . and see and hear you, and what you
give and take;
What is there you cannot give and take?
I see not merely that you are polite or whitefaced . . . . married or single . . . . citizens of old states or citizens of new states . . . . eminent in some profession . . . . a lady or gentleman in a parlor . . . . or dressed in the jail uniform . . . . or pulpit uniform,
Not only the free Utahan, Kansian, or Arkansian . . . . not only the free Cuban . . . . not merely the slave . . . . not Mexican native, or Flatfoot, or negro from Africa,
Iroquois eating the warflesh—fishtearer in his lair of rocks
and sand . . . . Esquimaux in the dark cold snowhouse . . . . Chinese with his transverse eyes . . . . Bedowee—or wandering nomad—or tabounschik at the head of his droves,
Grown, half-grown, and babe—of this country and every country, indoors and outdoors I see . . . . and all else is behind or through them.
The wife—and she is not one jot less than the husband, The daughter—and she is just as good as the son,
The mother—and she is every bit as much as the father.
Offspring of those not rich—boys apprenticed to trades,
Young fellows working on farms and old fellows working on farms;
The naive . . . . the simple and hardy . . . . he going to the polls to vote . . . . he who has a
good time, and he who has a bad time;
Mechanics, southerners, new arrivals, sailors, mano’warsmen, merchantmen, coasters, All these I see . . . . but nigher and farther the same I see;
None shall escape me, and none shall wish to escape me.
I bring what you much need, yet always have,
I bring not money or amours or dress or eating . . . . but I bring as good;
And send no agent or medium . . . . and offer no representative of value—but offer the
value itself.
There is something that comes home to one now and perpetually,
It is not what is printed or preached or discussed . . . . it eludes discussion and print,
It is not to be put in a book . . . . it is not in this book,
It is for you whoever you are . . . . it is no farther from you than your hearing and sight are


from you,
It is hinted by nearest and commonest and readiest . . . . it is not them, though it is
endlessly provoked by them . . . . What is there ready and near you now?
You may read in many languages and read nothing about it;
You may read the President’s message and read nothing about it there,
Nothing in the reports from the state department or treasury department . . . . or in the daily papers, or the weekly papers,
Or in the census returns or assessors’ returns or prices current or any accounts of stock.
The sun and stars that float in the open air . . . . the appleshaped earth and we upon it . . . . surely the drift of them is something grand;
I do not know what it is except that it is grand, and that it is happiness,
And that the enclosing purport of us here is not a speculation, or bon-mot or
reconnoissance,
And that it is not something which by luck may turn out well for us, and without luck must
be a failure for us,
And not something which may yet be retracted in a certain contingency.
The light and shade—the curious sense of body and identity—the greed that with perfect complaisance devours all things—the endless pride and outstretching of man— unspeakable joys and sorrows,
The wonder every one sees in every one else he sees . . . . and the wonders that fill each minute of time forever and each acre of surface and space forever,
Have you reckoned them as mainly for a trade or farmwork? or for the profits of a store? or to achieve yourself a position? or to fill a gentleman’s leisure or a lady’s leisure?
Have you reckoned the landscape took substance and form that it might be painted in a picture?
Or men and women that they might be written of, and songs sung?
Or the attraction of gravity and the great laws and harmonious combinations and the fluids
of the air as subjects for the savans?
Or the brown land and the blue sea for maps and charts?
Or the stars to be put in constellations and named fancy names?
Or that the growth of seeds is for agricultural tables or agriculture itself?
Old institutions . . . . these arts libraries legends collections—and the practice handed along in manufactures . . . . will we rate them so high?
Will we rate our prudence and business so high? . . . . I have no objection,
I rate them as high as the highest . . . . but a child born of a woman and man I rate beyond
all rate.
We thought our Union grand and our Constitution grand;
I do not say they are not grand and good—for they are,
I am this day just as much in love with them as you,
But I am eternally in love with you and with all my fellows upon the earth.


We consider the bibles and religions divine . . . . I do not say they are not divine,
I say they have all grown out of you and may grow out of you still,
It is not they who give the life . . . . it is you who give the life;
Leaves are not more shed from the trees or trees from the earth than they are shed out of
you.
The sum of all known value and respect I add up in you whoever you are;
The President is up there in the White House for you . . . . it is not you who are here for
him,
The Secretaries act in their bureaus for you . . . . not you here for them,
The Congress convenes every December for you,
Laws, courts, the forming of states, the charters of cities, the going and coming of
commerce and mails are all for you.
All doctrines, all politics and civilization exurge from you,
All sculpture and monuments and anything inscribed anywhere are tallied in you,
The gist of histories and statistics as far back as the records reach is in you this hour—and myths and tales the same;
If you were not breathing and walking here where would they all be?
The most renowned poems would be ashes . . . . orations and plays would be vacuums.
All architecture is what you do to it when you look upon it;
Did you think it was in the white or gray stone? or the lines of the arches and cornices?
All music is what awakens from you when you are reminded by the instruments,
It is not the violins and the cornets . . . . it is not the oboe nor the beating drums—nor the
notes of the baritone singer singing his sweet romanza . . . . nor those of the men’s
chorus, nor those of the women’s chorus, It is nearer and farther than they.
Will the whole come back then?
Can each see the signs of the best by a look in the lookingglass? Is there nothing greater or more?
Does all sit there with you and here with me?
The old forever new things . . . . you foolish child! . . . . the closest simplest things—this moment with you,
Your person and every particle that relates to your person,
The pulses of your brain waiting their chance and encouragement at every deed or sight; Anything you do in public by day, and anything you do in secret betweendays,
What is called right and what is called wrong . . . . what you behold or touch . . . . what
causes your anger or wonder,
The anklechain of the slave, the bed of the bedhouse, the cards of the gambler, the plates
of the forger;
What is seen or learned in the street, or intuitively learned,
What is learned in the public school—spelling, reading, writing and ciphering . . . . the
blackboard and the teacher’s diagrams:


The panes of the windows and all that appears through them . . . . the going forth in the morning and the aimless spending of the day;
(What is it that you made money? what is it that you got what you wanted?)
The usual routine . . . . the workshop, factory, yard, office, store, or desk;
The jaunt of hunting or fishing, or the life of hunting or fishing,
Pasturelife, foddering, milking and herding, and all the personnel and usages;
The plum-orchard and apple-orchard . . . . gardening . . seedlings, cuttings, flowers and
vines,
Grains and manures . . marl, clay, loam . . the subsoil plough . . the shovel and pick and
rake and hoe . . irrigation and draining;
The currycomb . . the horse-cloth . . the halter and bridle and bits . . the very wisps of
straw,
The barn and barn-yard . . the bins and mangers . . the mows and racks:
Manufactures . . commerce . . engineering . . the building of cities, and every trade carried
on there . . and the implements of every trade,
The anvil and tongs and hammer . . the axe and wedge . . the square and mitre and jointer
and smoothingplane;
The plumbob and trowel and level . . the wall-scaffold, and the work of walls and ceilings . .
or any mason-work:
The ship’s compass . . the sailor’s tarpaulin . . the stays and lanyards, and the ground-tackle
for anchoring or mooring,
The sloop’s tiller . . the pilot’s wheel and bell . . the yacht or fish-smack . . the great gay-
pennanted three-hundred-foot steamboat under full headway, with her proud fat
breasts and her delicate swift-flashing paddles;
The trail and line and hooks and sinkers . . the seine, and hauling the seine;
Smallarms and rifles . . . . the powder and shot and caps and wadding . . . . the ordnance
for war . . . . the carriages:
Everyday objects . . . . the housechairs, the carpet, the bed
and the counterpane of the bed, and him or her sleeping at night, and the wind
blowing, and the indefinite noises:
The snowstorm or rainstorm . . . . the tow-trowsers . . . . the lodge-hut in the woods, and
the still-hunt:
City and country . . fireplace and candle . . gaslight and heater and aqueduct;
The message of the governor, mayor, or chief of police . . . . the dishes of breakfast or
dinner or supper;
The bunkroom, the fire-engine, the string-team, and the car or truck behind;
The paper I write on or you write on . . and every word we write . . and every cross and twirl of the pen . . and the curious way we write what we think . . . . yet very faintly;
The directory, the detector, the ledger . . . . the books in ranks or the bookshelves . . . . the
clock attached to the wall,
The ring on your finger . . the lady’s wristlet . . the hammers of stonebreakers or
coppersmiths . . the druggist’s vials and jars;
The etui of surgical instruments, and the etui of oculist’s or aurist’s instruments, or dentist’s
instruments;
Glassblowing, grinding of wheat and corn . . casting, and what is cast . . tinroofing,
shingledressing,
Shipcarpentering, flagging of sidewalks by flaggers . . dockbuilding, fishcuring, ferrying;


The pump, the piledriver, the great derrick . . the coalkiln and brickkiln,
Ironworks or whiteleadworks . . the sugarhouse . . steam-saws, and the great mills and
factories;
The cottonbale . . the stevedore’s hook . . the saw and buck of the sawyer . . the screen of
the coalscreener . . the mould of the moulder . . the workingknife of the butcher; The cylinder press . . the handpress . . the frisket and tympan . . the compositor’s stick and
rule,
The implements for daguerreotyping . . . . the tools of the rigger or grappler or sailmaker
or blockmaker,
Goods of guttapercha or papiermache . . . . colors and brushes . . . . glaziers’ implements, The veneer and gluepot . . the confectioner’s ornaments . . the decanter and glasses . . the
shears and flatiron;
The awl and kneestrap . . the pint measure and quart measure . . the counter and stool . .
the writingpen of quill or metal;
Billiards and tenpins . . . . the ladders and hanging ropes of the gymnasium, and the manly
exercises;
The designs for wallpapers or oilcloths or carpets . . . . the fancies for goods for women
. . . . the bookbinder’s stamps;
Leatherdressing, coachmaking, boilermaking, ropetwisting, distilling, signpainting,
limeburning, coopering, cottonpicking,
The walkingbeam of the steam-engine . . the throttle and governors, and the up and down
rods,
Stavemachines and plainingmachines . . . . the cart of the carman . . the omnibus . . the
ponderous dray;
The snowplough and two engines pushing it . . . . the ride in the express train of only one
car . . . . the swift go through a howling storm:
The bearhunt or coonhunt . . . . the bonfire of shavings in the open lot in the city . . the
crowd of children watching;
The blows of the fighting-man . . the upper cut and one-two-three;
The shopwindows . . . . the coffins in the sexton’s wareroom . . . . the fruit on the fruitstand
. . . . the beef on the butcher’s stall,
The bread and cakes in the bakery . . . . the white and red pork in the pork-store;
The milliner’s ribbons . . the dressmaker’s patterns . . . . the tea-table . . the homemade
sweetmeats:
The column of wants in the one-cent paper . . the news by telegraph . . . . the amusements
and operas and shows:
The cotton and woolen and linen you wear . . . . the money you make and spend;
Your room and bedroom . . . . your piano-forte . . . . the stove and cookpans,
The house you live in . . . . the rent . . . . the other tenants . . . . the deposite in the savings-
bank . . . . the trade at the grocery,
The pay on Saturday night . . . . the going home, and the purchases;
In them the heft of the heaviest . . . . in them far more than you estimated, and far less also, In them, not yourself . . . . you and your soul enclose all things, regardless of estimation,
In them your themes and hints and provokers . . if not, the whole earth has no themes or
hints or provokers, and never had.
I do not affirm what you see beyond is futile . . . . I do not advise you to stop,


I do not say leadings you thought great are not great,
But I say that none lead to greater or sadder or happier than those lead to.
Will you seek afar off? You surely come back at last,
In things best known to you finding the best or as good as the best,
In folks nearest to you finding also the sweetest and strongest and lovingest,
Happiness not in another place, but this place . . not for another hour, but this hour,
Man in the first you see or touch . . . . always in your friend or brother or nighest neighbor .
. . . Woman in your mother or lover or wife,
And all else thus far known giving place to men and women.
When the psalm sings instead of the singer,
When the script preaches instead of the preacher,
When the pulpit descends and goes instead of the carver that carved the supporting desk, When the sacred vessels or the bits of the eucharist, or the lath and plast, procreate as
effectually as the young silversmiths or bakers, or the masons in their overalls, When a university course convinces like a slumbering woman and child convince, When the minted gold in the vault smiles like the nightwatchman’s daughter,
When warrantee deeds loafe in chairs opposite and are my friendly companions,
I intend to reach them my hand and make as much of them as I do of men and women.


[To Think of Time]
To think of time . . . . to think through the retrospection, To think of today . . and the ages continued henceforward.
Have you guessed you yourself would not continue? Have you dreaded those earth- beetles?
Have you feared the future would be nothing to you?
Is today nothing? Is the beginningless past nothing? If the future is nothing they are just as surely nothing.
To think that the sun rose in the east . . . . that men and women were flexible and real and alive . . . . that every thing was real and alive;
To think that you and I did not see feel think nor bear our part, To think that we are now here and bear our part.
Not a day passes . . not a minute or second without an accouchement; Not a day passes . . not a minute or second without a corpse.
When the dull nights are over, and the dull days also,
When the soreness of lying so much in bed is over,
When the physician, after long putting off, gives the silent and terrible look for an answer, When the children come hurried and weeping, and the brothers and sisters have been sent
for,
When medicines stand unused on the shelf, and the camphor-smell has pervaded the
rooms,
When the faithful hand of the living does not desert the hand of the dying, When the twitching lips press lightly on the forehead of the dying,
When the breath ceases and the pulse of the heart ceases,
Then the corpse-limbs stretch on the bed, and the living look upon them, They are palpable as the living are palpable.
The living look upon the corpse with their eyesight,
But without eyesight lingers a different living and looks curiously on the corpse.
To think that the rivers will come to flow, and the snow fall, and fruits ripen . . and act upon others as upon us now . . . . yet not act upon us;
To think of all these wonders of city and country . . and others taking great interest in them . . and we taking small interest in them.
To think how eager we are in building our houses,
To think others shall be just as eager . . and we quite indifferent.
I see one building the house that serves him a few years . . . . or seventy or eighty years at most;
I see one building the house that serves him longer than that.


Slowmoving and black lines creep over the whole earth . . . . they never cease . . . . they are the burial lines,
He that was President was buried, and he that is now President shall surely be buried.
Cold dash of waves at the ferrywharf,
Posh and ice in the river . . . . half-frozen mud in the streets,
A gray discouraged sky overhead . . . . the short last daylight of December, A hearse and stages . . . . other vehicles give place,
The funeral of an old stagedriver . . . . the cortege mostly drivers.
Rapid the trot to the cemetery,
Duly rattles the deathbell . . . . the gate is passed . . . . the grave is halted at . . . . the living
alight . . . . the hearse uncloses,
The coffin is lowered and settled . . . . the whip is laid on the coffin,
The earth is swiftly shovelled in . . . . a minute . . no one moves or speaks . . . . it is done, He is decently put away . . . . is there anything more?
He was a goodfellow,
Freemouthed, quicktempered, not badlooking, able to take his own part,
Witty, sensitive to a slight, ready with life or death for a friend,
Fond of women, . . played some . . eat hearty and drank hearty,
Had known what it was to be flush . . grew lowspirited toward the last . . sickened . . was
helped by a contribution,
Died aged forty-one years . . and that was his funeral.
Thumb extended or finger uplifted,
Apron, cape, gloves, strap . . . . wetweather clothes . . . . whip carefully chosen . . . . boss,
spotter, starter, and hostler,
Somebody loafing on you, or you loafing on somebody . . . . headway . . . . man before and
man behind,
Good day’s work or bad day’s work . . . . pet stock or mean stock . . . . first out or last out
. . . . turning in at night,
To think that these are so much and so nigh to other drivers . . and he there takes no
interest in them.
The markets, the government, the workingman’s wages . . . . to think what account they are through our nights and days;
To think that other workingmen will make just as great account of them . . yet we make little or no account.
The vulgar and the refined . . . . what you call sin and what you call goodness . . to think how wide a difference;
To think the difference will still continue to others, yet we lie beyond the difference.
To think how much pleasure there is!
Have you pleasure from looking at the sky? Have you pleasure from poems?


Do you enjoy yourself in the city? or engaged in business? or planning a nomination and election? or with your wife and family?
Or with your mother and sisters? or in womanly housework? or the beautiful maternal cares?
These also flow onward to others . . . . you and I flow onward; But in due time you and I shall take less interest in them.
Your farm and profits and crops . . . . to think how engrossed you are;
To think there will still be farms and profits and crops . . yet for you of what avail?
What will be will be well—for what is is well,
To take interest is well, and not to take interest shall be well.
The sky continues beautiful . . . . the pleasure of men with women shall never be sated . . nor the pleasure of women with men . . nor the pleasure from poems;
The domestic joys, the daily housework or business, the building of houses—they are not phantasms . . they have weight and form and location;
The farms and profits and crops . . the markets and wages and government . . they also are not phantasms;
The difference between sin and goodness is no apparition;
The earth is not an echo . . . . man and his life and all the things of his life are well-
considered.
You are not thrown to the winds . . you gather certainly and safely around yourself, Yourself! Yourself! Yourself forever and ever!
It is not to diffuse you that you were born of your mother and father—it is to identify you, It is not that you should be undecided, but that you should be decided;
Something long preparing and formless is arrived and formed in you,
You are thenceforth secure, whatever comes or goes.
The threads that were spun are gathered . . . . the weft crosses the warp . . . . the pattern is systematic.
The preparations have every one been justified;
The orchestra have tuned their instruments sufficiently . . . . the baton has given the signal.
The guest that was coming . . . . he waited long for reasons . . . . he is now housed,
He is one of those who are beautiful and happy . . . . he is one of those that to look upon
and be with is enough.
The law of the past cannot be eluded.
The law of the present and future cannot be eluded,
The law of the living cannot be eluded . . . . it is eternal,
The law of promotion and transformation cannot be eluded, The law of heroes and good-doers cannot be eluded,


The law of drunkards and informers and mean persons cannot be eluded.
Slowmoving and black lines go ceaselessly over the earth,
Northerner goes carried and southerner goes carried . . . . and they on the Atlantic side and
they on the Pacific, and they between, and all through the Mississippi country . . . . and all over the earth.
The great masters and kosmos are well as they go . . . . the heroes and good-doers are well, The known leaders and inventors and the rich owners and pious and distinguished may be
well,
But there is more account than that . . . . there is strict account of all.
The interminable hordes of the ignorant and wicked are not nothing,
The barbarians of Africa and Asia are not nothing,
The common people of Europe are not nothing . . . . the American aborigines are not
nothing,
A zambo or a foreheadless Crowfoot or a Camanche is not nothing,
The infected in the immigrant hospital are not nothing . . . . the murderer or mean person
is not nothing,
The perpetual succession of shallow people are not nothing as they go,
The prostitute is not nothing . . . . the mocker of religion is not nothing as he goes.
I shall go with the rest . . . . we have satisfaction:
I have dreamed that we are not to be changed so much . . . . nor the law of us changed; I have dreamed that heroes and good-doers shall be under the present and past law, And that murderers and drunkards and liars shall be under the present and past law; For I have dreamed that the law they are under now is enough.
And I have dreamed that the satisfaction is not so much changed . . . . and that there is no life without satisfaction;
What is the earth? what are body and soul without satisfaction?
I shall go with the rest,
We cannot be stopped at a given point . . . . that is no satisfaction;
To show us a good thing or a few good things for a space of time—that is no satisfaction; We must have the indestructible breed of the best, regardless of time.
If otherwise, all these things came but to ashes of dung;
If maggots and rats ended us, then suspicion and treachery and death.
Do you suspect death? If I were to suspect death I should die now,
Do you think I could walk pleasantly and well-suited toward annihilation?
Pleasantly and well-suited I walk,
Whither I walk I cannot define, but I know it is good, The whole universe indicates that it is good,
The past and the present indicate that it is good.


How beautiful and perfect are the animals! How perfect is my soul!
How perfect the earth, and the minutest thing upon it!
What is called good is perfect, and what is called sin is just as perfect;
The vegetables and minerals are all perfect . . and the imponderable fluids are perfect; Slowly and surely they have passed on to this, and slowly and surely they will yet pass on.
O my soul! if I realize you I have satisfaction,
Animals and vegetables! if I realize you I have satisfaction, Laws of the earth and air! if I realize you I have satisfaction.
I cannot define my satisfaction . . yet it is so, I cannot define my life . . yet it is so.
I swear I see now that every thing has an eternal soul!
The trees have, rooted in the ground . . . . the weeds of the sea have . . . . the animals.
I swear I think there is nothing but immortality!
That the exquisite scheme is for it, and the nebulous float is for it, and the cohering is for it, And all preparation is for it . . and identity is for it . . and life and death are for it.


[The Sleepers]
I wander all night in my vision,
Stepping with light feet . . . . swiftly and noiselessly stepping and stopping, Bending with open eyes over the shut eyes of sleepers;
Wandering and confused . . . . lost to myself . . . . ill-assorted . . . . contradictory, Pausing and gazing and bending and stopping.
How solemn they look there, stretched and still;
How quiet they breathe, the little children in their cradles.
The wretched features of ennuyees, the white features of corpses, the livid faces of drunkards, the sick-gray faces of onanists,
The gashed bodies on battlefields, the insane in their strong-doored rooms, the sacred idiots,
The newborn emerging from gates and the dying emerging from gates, The night pervades them and enfolds them.
The married couple sleep calmly in their bed, he with his palm on the hip of the wife, and she with her palm on the hip of the husband,
The sisters sleep lovingly side by side in their bed,
The men sleep lovingly side by side in theirs,
And the mother sleeps with her little child carefully wrapped.
The blind sleep, and the deaf and dumb sleep,
The prisoner sleeps well in the prison . . . . the runaway son sleeps, The murderer that is to be hung next day . . . . how does he sleep? And the murdered person . . . . how does he sleep?
The female that loves unrequited sleeps,
And the male that loves unrequited sleeps;
The head of the moneymaker that plotted all day sleeps, And the enraged and treacherous dispositions sleep.
I stand with drooping eyes by the worstsuffering and restless,
I pass my hands soothingly to and fro a few inches from them; The restless sink in their beds . . . . they fitfully sleep.
The earth recedes from me into the night,
I saw that it was beautiful . . . . and I see that what is not the earth is beautiful.
I go from bedside to bedside . . . . I sleep close with the other sleepers, each in turn; I dream in my dream all the dreams of the other dreamers,
And I become the other dreamers.
I am a dance . . . . Play up there! the fit is whirling me fast.


I am the everlaughing . . . . it is new moon and twilight,
I see the hiding of douceurs . . . . I see nimble ghosts whichever way I look,
Cache and cache again deep in the ground and sea, and where it is neither ground or sea.
Well do they do their jobs, those journeymen divine,
Only from me can they hide nothing and would not if they could;
I reckon I am their boss, and they make me a pet besides,
And surround me, and lead me and run ahead when I walk,
And lift their cunning covers and signify me with stretched arms, and resume the way; Onward we move, a gay gang of blackguards with mirthshouting music and wildflapping
pennants of joy.
I am the actor and the actress . . . . the voter . . the politician,
The emigrant and the exile . . the criminal that stood in the box,
He who has been famous, and he who shall be famous after today,
The stammerer . . . . the wellformed person . . the wasted or feeble person.
I am she who adorned herself and folded her hair expectantly, My truant lover has come and it is dark.
Double yourself and receive me darkness,
Receive me and my lover too . . . . he will not let me go without him.
I roll myself upon you as upon a bed . . . . I resign myself to the dusk.
He whom I call answers me and takes the place of my lover, He rises with me silently from the bed.
Darkness you are gentler than my lover . . . . his flesh was sweaty and panting, I feel the hot moisture yet that he left me.
My hands are spread forth . . I pass them in all directions,
I would sound up the shadowy shore to which you are journeying.
Be careful, darkness . . . . already, what was it touched me?
I thought my lover had gone . . . . else darkness and he are one, I hear the heart-beat . . . . I follow . . I fade away.
O hotcheeked and blushing! O foolish hectic!
O for pity’s sake, no one must see me now! . . . . my clothes were stolen while I was abed, Now I am thrust forth, where shall I run?
Pier that I saw dimly last night when I looked from the windows,
Pier out from the main, let me catch myself with you and stay . . . . I will not chafe you;
I feel ashamed to go naked about the world,
And am curious to know where my feet stand . . . . and what is this flooding me, childhood


or manhood . . . . and the hunger that crosses the bridge between.
The cloth laps a first sweet eating and drinking,
Laps life-swelling yolks . . . . laps ear of rose-corn, milky and just ripened:
The white teeth stay, and the boss-tooth advances in darkness,
And liquor is spilled on lips and bosoms by touching glasses, and the best liquor afterward.
I descend my western course . . . . my sinews are flaccid, Perfume and youth course through me, and I am their wake.
It is my face yellow and wrinkled instead of the old woman’s,
I sit low in a strawbottom chair and carefully darn my grandson’s stockings.
It is I too . . . . the sleepless widow looking out on the winter midnight, I see the sparkles of starshine on the icy and pallid earth.
A shroud I see—and I am the shroud . . . . I wrap a body and lie in the coffin;
It is dark here underground . . . . it is not evil or pain here . . . . it is blank here, for reasons.
It seems to me that everything in the light and air ought to be happy; Whoever is not in his coffin and the dark grave, let him know he has enough.
I see a beautiful gigantic swimmer swimming naked through the eddies of the sea,
His brown hair lies close and even to his head . . . . he strikes out with courageous arms
. . . . he urges himself with his legs.
I see his white body . . . . I see his undaunted eyes;
I hate the swift-running eddies that would dash him headforemost on the rocks.
What are you doing you ruffianly red-trickled waves?
Will you kill the courageous giant? Will you kill him in the prime of his middle age?
Steady and long he struggles;
He is baffled and banged and bruised . . . . he holds out while his strength holds out,
The slapping eddies are spotted with his blood . . . . they bear him away . . . . they roll him
and swing him and turn him:
His beautiful body is borne in the circling eddies . . . . it is continually bruised on rocks, Swiftly and out of sight is borne the brave corpse.
I turn but do not extricate myself;
Confused . . . . a pastreading . . . . another, but with darkness yet.
The beach is cut by the razory ice-wind . . . . the wreck-guns sound, The tempest lulls and the moon comes floundering through the drifts.
I look where the ship helplessly heads end on . . . . I hear the burst as she strikes . . I hear the howls of dismay . . . . they grow fainter and fainter.


I cannot aid with my wringing fingers;
I can but rush to the surf and let it drench me and freeze upon me.
I search with the crowd . . . . not one of the company is washed to us alive; In the morning I help pick up the dead and lay them in rows in a barn.
Now of the old war-days . . the defeat at Brooklyn;
Washington stands inside the lines . . he stands on the entrenched hills amid a crowd of
officers,
His face is cold and damp . . . . he cannot repress the weeping drops . . . . he lifts the glass
perpetually to his eyes . . . . the color is blanched from his cheeks,
He sees the slaughter of the southern braves confided to him by their parents.
The same at last and at last when peace is declared,
He stands in the room of the old tavern . . . . the wellbeloved soldiers all pass through, The officers speechless and slow draw near in their turns,
The chief encircles their necks with his arm and kisses them on the cheek,
He kisses lightly the wet cheeks one after another . . . . he shakes hands and bids goodbye
to the army.
Now I tell what my mother told me today as we sat at dinner together,
Of when she was a nearly grown girl living home with her parents on the old homestead.
A red squaw came one breakfasttime to the old homestead,
On her back she carried a bundle of rushes for rushbottoming chairs;
Her hair straight shiny coarse black and profuse halfenveloped her face,
Her step was free and elastic . . . . her voice sounded exquisitely as she spoke.
My mother looked in delight and amazement at the stranger,
She looked at the beauty of her tallborne face and full and pliant limbs,
The more she looked upon her she loved her,
Never before had she seen such wonderful beauty and purity;
She made her sit on a bench by the jamb of the fireplace . . . . she cooked food for her, She had no work to give her but she gave her remembrance and fondness.
The red squaw staid all the forenoon, and toward the middle of the afternoon she went away;
O my mother was loth to have her go away,
All the week she thought of her . . . . she watched for her many a month, She remembered her many a winter and many a summer,
But the red squaw never came nor was heard of there again.
Now Lucifer was not dead . . . . or if he was I am his sorrowful terrible heir;
I have been wronged . . . . I am oppressed . . . . I hate him that oppresses me, I will either destroy him, or he shall release me.
Damn him! how he does defile me,


How he informs against my brother and sister and takes pay for their blood,
How he laughs when I look down the bend after the steamboat that carries away my
woman.
Now the vast dusk bulk that is the whale’s bulk . . . . it seems mine, Warily, sportsman! though I lie so sleepy and sluggish, my tap is death.
A show of the summer softness . . . . a contact of something unseen . . . . an amour of the light and air;
I am jealous and overwhelmed with friendliness,
And will go gallivant with the light and the air myself,
And have an unseen something to be in contact with them also.
O love and summer! you are in the dreams and in me,
Autumn and winter are in the dreams . . . . the farmer goes with his thrift, The droves and crops increase . . . . the barns are wellfilled.
Elements merge in the night . . . . ships make tacks in the dreams . . . . the sailor sails . . . . the exile returns home,
The fugitive returns unharmed . . . . the immigrant is back beyond months and years; The poor Irishman lives in the simple house of his childhood, with the wellknown
neighbors and faces,
They warmly welcome him . . . . he is barefoot again . . . . he forgets he is welloff;
The Dutchman voyages home, and the Scotchman and Welchman voyage home . . and the native of the Mediterranean voyages home;
To every port of England and France and Spain enter wellfilled ships;
The Swiss foots it toward his hills . . . . the Prussian goes his way, and the Hungarian his
way, and the Pole goes his way,
The Swede returns, and the Dane and Norwegian return.
The homeward bound and the outward bound,
The beautiful lost swimmer, the ennuyee, the onanist, the female that loves unrequited, the
moneymaker,
The actor and actress . . those through with their parts and those waiting to commence, The affectionate boy, the husband and wife, the voter, the nominee that is chosen and the
nominee that has failed,
The great already known, and the great anytime after to day,
The stammerer, the sick, the perfectformed, the homely,
The criminal that stood in the box, the judge that sat and sentenced him, the fluent lawyers,
the jury, the audience,
The laugher and weeper, the dancer, the midnight widow, the red squaw, The consumptive, the erysipalite, the idiot, he that is wronged,
The antipodes, and every one between this and them in the dark,
I swear they are averaged now . . . . one is no better than the other,
The night and sleep have likened them and restored them.


I swear they are all beautiful,
Every one that sleeps is beautiful . . . . every thing in the dim night is beautiful, The wildest and bloodiest is over and all is peace.
Peace is always beautiful,
The myth of heaven indicates peace and night.
The myth of heaven indicates the soul;
The soul is always beautiful . . . . it appears more or it appears less . . . . it comes or lags
behind,
It comes from its embowered garden and looks pleasantly on itself and encloses the world; Perfect and clean the genitals previously jetting, and perfect and clean the womb cohering, The head wellgrown and proportioned and plumb, and the bowels and joints proportioned
and plumb.
The soul is always beautiful,
The universe is duly in order . . . . every thing is in its place,
What is arrived is in its place, and what waits is in its place;
The twisted skull waits . . . . the watery or rotten blood waits,
The child of the glutton or venerealee waits long, and the child of the drunkard waits long,
and the drunkard himself waits long,
The sleepers that lived and died wait . . . . the far advanced are to go on in their turns, and
the far behind are to go on in their turns,
The diverse shall be no less diverse, but they shall flow and unite . . . . they unite now.
The sleepers are very beautiful as they lie unclothed,
They flow hand in hand over the whole earth from east to west as they lie unclothed; The Asiatic and African are hand in hand . . . . the European and American are hand in
hand,
Learned and unlearned are hand in hand . . and male and female are hand in hand;
The bare arm of the girl crosses the bare breast of her lover . . . . they press close without
lust . . . . his lips press her neck,
The father holds his grown or ungrown son in his arms with measureless love . . . . and the
son holds the father in his arms with measureless love,
The white hair of the mother shines on the white wrist of the daughter,
The breath of the boy goes with the breath of the man . . . . friend is inarmed by friend, The scholar kisses the teacher and the teacher kisses the scholar . . . . the wronged is made
right,
The call of the slave is one with the master’s call . . and the master salutes the slave,
The felon steps forth from the prison . . . . the insane becomes sane . . . . the suffering of
sick persons is relieved,
The sweatings and fevers stop . . the throat that was unsound is sound . . the lungs of the
consumptive are resumed . . the poor distressed head is free,
The joints of the rheumatic move as smoothly as ever, and smoother than ever, Stiflings and passages open . . . . the paralysed become supple,
The swelled and convulsed and congested awake to themselves in condition,


They pass the invigoration of the night and the chemistry of the night and awake.
I too pass from the night;
I stay awhile away O night, but I return to you again and love you;
Why should I be afraid to trust myself to you?
I am not afraid . . . . I have been well brought forward by you;
I love the rich running day, but I do not desert her in whom I lay so long;
I know not how I came of you, and I know not where I go with you . . . . but I know I came
well and shall go well.
I will stop only a time with the night . . . . and rise betimes.
I will duly pass the day O my mother and duly return to you;
Not you will yield forth the dawn again more surely than you will yield forth me again, Not the womb yields the babe in its time more surely than I shall be yielded from you in
my time.


[I Sing the Body Electric]
The bodies of men and women engirth me, and I engirth them,
They will not let me off nor I them till I go with them and respond to them and love them.
Was it dreamed whether those who corrupted their own live bodies could conceal themselves?
And whether those who defiled the living were as bad as they who defiled the dead?
The expression of the body of man or woman balks account, The male is perfect and that of the female is perfect.
The expression of a wellmade man appears not only in his face,
It is in his limbs and joints also . . . . it is curiously in the joints of his hips and wrists,
It is in his walk . . the carriage of his neck . . the flex of his waist and knees . . . . dress does
not hide him,
The strong sweet supple quality he has strikes through the cotton and flannel; To see him pass conveys as much as the best poem . . perhaps more,
You linger to see his back and the back of his neck and shoulderside.
The sprawl and fulness of babes . . . . the bosoms and heads of women . . . . the folds of their dress . . . . their style as we pass in the street . . . . the contour of their shape downwards;
The swimmer naked in the swimmingbath . . seen as he swims through the salt transparent greenshine, or lies on his back and rolls silently with the heave of the water;
Framers bare-armed framing a house . . hoisting the beams in their places . . or using the mallet and mortising-chisel,
The bending forward and backward of rowers in rowboats . . . . the horseman in his saddle; Girls and mothers and housekeepers in all their exquisite offices,
The group of laborers seated at noontime with their open dinnerkettles, and their wives
waiting,
The female soothing a child . . . . the farmer’s daughter in the garden or cowyard,
The woodman rapidly swinging his axe in the woods . . . . the young fellow hoeing corn
. . . . the sleighdriver guiding his six horses through the crowd,
The wrestle of wrestlers . . two apprentice-boys, quite grown, lusty, goodnatured,
nativeborn, out on the vacant lot at sundown after work,
The coats vests and caps thrown down . . the embrace of love and resistance,
The upperhold and underhold—the hair rumpled over and blinding the eyes;
The march of firemen in their own costumes—the play of the masculine muscle through
cleansetting trowsers and waistbands,
The slow return from the fire . . . . the pause when the bell strikes suddenly again—the
listening on the alert,
The natural perfect and varied attitudes . . . . the bent head, the curved neck, the counting: Suchlike I love . . . . I loosen myself and pass freely . . . . and am at the mother’s breast
with the little child,
And swim with the swimmer, and wrestle with wrestlers, and march in line with the


firemen, and pause and listen and count.
I knew a man . . . . he was a common farmer . . . . he was the father of five sons . . . . and in them were the fathers of sons . . . . and in them were the fathers of sons.
This man was of wonderful vigor and calmness and beauty of person; The shape of his head, the richness and breadth of his
manners, the pale yellow and white of his hair and beard, the immeasurable
meaning of his black eyes,
These I used to go and visit him to see . . . . He was wise also,
He was six feet tall . . . . he was over eighty years old . . . . his sons were massive clean
bearded tanfaced and handsome,
They and his daughters loved him . . . . all who saw him loved him . . . . they did not love
him by allowance . . . . they loved him with personal love;
He drank water only . . . . the blood showed like scarlet through the clear brown skin of his
face;
He was a frequent gunner and fisher . . . . he sailed his boat himself . . . . he had a fine one
presented to him by a shipjoiner . . . . he had fowling-pieces, presented to him by
men that loved him;
When he went with his five sons and many grandsons to hunt or fish you would pick him
out as the most beautiful and vigorous of the gang,
You would wish long and long to be with him . . . . you would wish to sit by him in the boat
that you and he might touch each other.
I have perceived that to be with those I like is enough,
To stop in company with the rest at evening is enough,
To be surrounded by beautiful curious breathing laughing flesh is enough,
To pass among them . . to touch any one . . . . to rest my arm ever so lightly round his or
her neck for a moment . . . . what is this then?
I do not ask any more delight . . . . I swim in it as in a sea.
There is something in staying close to men and women and looking on them and in the contact and odor of them that pleases the soul well,
All things please the soul, but these please the soul well.
This is the female form,
A divine nimbus exhales from it from head to foot,
It attracts with fierce undeniable attraction,
I am drawn by its breath as if I were no more than a helpless vapor . . . . all falls aside but
myself and it,
Books, art, religion, time . . the visible and solid earth . . the atmosphere and the fringed
clouds . . what was expected of heaven or feared of hell are now consumed,
Mad filaments, ungovernable shoots play out of it . . the response likewise ungovernable, Hair, bosom, hips, bend of legs, negligent falling hands—all diffused . . . . mine too
diffused,
Ebb stung by the flow, and flow stung by the ebb . . . . loveflesh swelling and deliciously
aching,


Limitless limpid jets of love hot and enormous . . . . quivering jelly of love . . . . white-blow and delirious juice,
Bridegroom-night of love working surely and softly into the prostrate dawn, Undulating into the willing and yielding day,
Lost in the cleave of the clasping and sweetfleshed day.
This is the nucleus . . . . after the child is born of woman the man is born of woman, This is the bath of birth . . . . this is the merge of small and large and the outlet again.
Be not ashamed women . . your privilege encloses the rest . . it is the exit of the rest, You are the gates of the body and you are the gates of the soul.
The female contains all qualities and tempers them . . . . she is in her place . . . . she moves with perfect balance,
She is all things duly veiled . . . . she is both passive and active . . . . she is to conceive daughters as well as sons and sons as well as daughters.
As I see my soul reflected in nature . . . . as I see through a mist one with inexpressible completeness and beauty . . . . see the bent head and arms folded over the breast . . . . the female I see,
I see the bearer of the great fruit which is immortality . . . . the good thereof is not tasted by roues, and never can be.
The male is not less the soul, nor more . . . . he too is in his place,
He too is all qualities . . . . he is action and power . . . . the flush of the known universe is in
him,
Scorn becomes him well and appetite and defiance become him well,
The fiercest largest passions . . bliss that is utmost and sorrow that is utmost become him
well . . . . pride is for him,
The fullspread pride of man is calming and excellent to the soul;
Knowledge becomes him . . . . he likes it always . . . . he brings everything to the test of
himself,
Whatever the survey . . whatever the sea and the sail, he strikes soundings at last only here, Where else does he strike soundings except here?
The man’s body is sacred and the woman’s body is sacred . . . . it is no matter who, Is it a slave? Is it one of the dullfaced immigrants just landed on the wharf?
Each belongs here or anywhere just as much as the welloff . . . . just as much as you, Each has his or her place in the procession.
All is a procession,
The universe is a procession with measured and beautiful motion.
Do you know so much that you call the slave or the dullface ignorant?
Do you suppose you have a right to a good sight . . . . and he or she has no right to a sight?


Do you think matter has cohered together from its diffused float, and the soil is on the surface and water runs and vegetation sprouts for you . . and not for him and her?
A slave at auction!
I help the auctioneer . . . . the sloven does not half know his business.
Gentlemen look on this curious creature,
Whatever the bids of the bidders they cannot be high enough for him,
For him the globe lay preparing quintillions of years without one animal or plant, For him the revolving cycles truly and steadily rolled.
In that head the allbaffling brain,
In it and below it the making of the attributes of heroes.
Examine these limbs, red black or white . . . . they are very cunning in tendon and nerve; They shall be stript that you may see them.
Exquisite senses, lifelit eyes, pluck, volition,
Flakes of breastmuscle, pliant backbone and neck, flesh not flabby, goodsized arms and
legs,
And wonders within there yet.
Within there runs his blood . . . . the same old blood . . the same red running blood; There swells and jets his heart . . . . There all passions and desires . . all reachings and
aspirations:
Do you think they are not there because they are not expressed in parlors and lecture-
rooms?
This is not only one man . . . . he is the father of those who shall be fathers in their turns, In him the start of populous states and rich republics,
Of him countless immortal lives with countless embodiments and enjoyments.
How do you know who shall come from the offspring of his offspring through the centuries?
Who might you find you have come from yourself if you could trace back through the centuries?
A woman at auction,
She too is not only herself . . . . she is the teeming mother of mothers, She is the bearer of them that shall grow and be mates to the mothers.
Her daughters or their daughters’ daughters . . who knows who shall mate with them? Who knows through the centuries what heroes may come from them?
In them and of them natal love . . . . in them the divine mystery . . . . the same old beautiful mystery.


Have you ever loved a woman?
Your mother . . . . is she living? . . . . Have you been much with her? and has she been
much with you?
Do you not see that these are exactly the same to all in all nations and times all over the
earth?
If life and the soul are sacred the human body is sacred;
And the glory and sweet of a man is the token of manhood untainted,
And in man or woman a clean strong firmfibred body is beautiful as the most beautiful
face.
Have you seen the fool that corrupted his own live body? or the fool that corrupted her own live body?
For they do not conceal themselves, and cannot conceal themselves.
Who degrades or defiles the living human body is cursed, Who degrades or defiles the body of the dead is not more
cursed.


[Faces]
Sauntering the pavement or riding the country byroad here then are faces,
Faces of friendship, precision, caution, suavity, ideality,
The spiritual prescient face, the always welcome common benevolent face,
The face of the singing of music, the grand faces of natural lawyers and judges broad at the
backtop,
The faces of hunters and fishers, bulged at the brows . . . . the shaved blanched faces of
orthodox citizens,
The pure extravagant yearning questioning artist’s face,
The welcome ugly face of some beautiful soul . . . . the handsome detested or despised
face,
The sacred faces of infants . . . . the illuminated face of the mother of many children, The face of an amour . . . . the face of veneration,
The face as of a dream . . . . the face of an immobile rock,
The face withdrawn of its good and bad . . a castrated face,
A wild hawk . . his wings clipped by the clipper,
A stallion that yielded at last to the thongs and knife of the gelder.
Sauntering the pavement or crossing the ceaseless ferry, here then are faces; I see them and complain not and am content with all.
Do you suppose I could be content with all if I thought them their own finale?
This now is too lamentable a face for a man;
Some abject louse asking leave to be . . cringing for it,
Some milknosed maggot blessing what lets it wrig to its hole.
This face is a dog’s snout sniffing for garbage;
Snakes nest in that mouth . . I hear the sibilant threat.
This face is a haze more chill than the arctic sea, Its sleepy and wobbling icebergs crunch as they go.
This is a face of bitter herbs . . . . this an emetic . . . . they need no label, And more of the drugshelf . . laudanum, caoutchouc, or hog’s lard.
This face is an epilepsy advertising and doing business . . . . its wordless tongue gives out the unearthly cry,
Its veins down the neck distend . . . . its eyes roll till they show nothing but their whites, Its teeth grit . . the palms of the hands are cut by the turned-in nails,
The man falls struggling and foaming to the ground while he speculates well.
This face is bitten by vermin and worms,
And this is some murderer’s knife with a halfpulled scabbard.


This face owes to the sexton his dismalest fee, An unceasing deathbell tolls there.
Those are really men! . . . . the bosses and tufts of the great round globe.
Features of my equals, would you trick me with your creased and cadaverous march? Well then you cannot trick me.
I see your rounded never-erased flow,
I see neath the rims of your haggard and mean disguises.
Splay and twist as you like . . . . poke with the tangling fores of fishes or rats, You’ll be unmuzzled . . . . you certainly will.
I saw the face of the most smeared and slobbering idiot they had at the asylum, And I knew for my consolation what they knew not;
I knew of the agents that emptied and broke my brother,
The same wait to clear the rubbish from the fallen tenement;
And I shall look again in a score or two of ages,
And I shall meet the real landlord perfect and unharmed, every inch as good as myself.
The Lord advances and yet advances:
Always the shadow in front . . . . always the reached hand bringing up the laggards.
Out of this face emerge banners and horses . . . . O superb! . . . . I see what is coming, I see the high pioneercaps . . . . I see the staves of runners clearing the way,
I hear victorious drums.
This face is a lifeboat;
This is the face commanding and bearded . . . . it asks no odds of the rest; This face is flavored fruit ready for eating;
This face of a healthy honest boy is the programme of all good.
These faces bear testimony slumbering or awake, They show their descent from the Master himself.
Off the word I have spoken I except not one . . . . red white or black, all are deific, In each house is the ovum . . . . it comes forth after a thousand years.
Spots or cracks at the windows do not disturb me,
Tall and sufficient stand behind and make signs to me; I read the promise and patiently wait.
This is a fullgrown lily’s face,
She speaks to the limber-hip’d man near the garden pickets,
Come here, she blushingly cries . . . . Come nigh to me limber-hip’d man and give me your


finger and thumb,
Stand at my side till I lean as high as I can upon you,
Fill me with albescent honey . . . . bend down to me,
Rub to me with your chafing beard . . rub to my breast and shoulders.
The old face of the mother of many children: Whist! I am fully content.
Lulled and late is the smoke of the Sabbath morning,
It hangs low over the rows of trees by the fences,
It hangs thin by the sassafras, the wildcherry and the catbrier under them.
I saw the rich ladies in full dress at the soiree,
I heard what the run of poets were saying so long,
Heard who sprang in crimson youth from the white froth and the water-blue.
Behold a woman!
She looks out from her quaker cap . . . . her face is clearer and more beautiful than the sky.
She sits in an armchair under the shaded porch of the farmhouse, The sun just shines on her old white head.
Her ample gown is of creamhued linen,
Her grandsons raised the flax, and her granddaughters spun it with the distaff and the
wheel.
The melodious character of the earth!
The finish beyond which philosophy cannot go and does not wish to go! The justified mother of men!


[Song of the Answerer]
A young man came to me with a message from his brother,
How should the young man know the whether and when of his brother? Tell him to send me the signs.
And I stood before the young man face to face, and took his right hand in my left hand and his left hand in my right hand,
And I answered for his brother and for men . . . . and I answered for the poet, and sent these signs.
Him all wait for . . . . him all yield up to . . . . his word is decisive and final, Him they accept . . . . in him lave . . . . in him perceive themselves as amid light, Him they immerse, and he immerses them.
Beautiful women, the haughtiest nations, laws, the landscape, people and animals, The profound earth and its attributes, and the unquiet ocean,
All enjoyments and properties, and money, and whatever money will buy,
The best farms . . . . others toiling and planting, and he unavoidably reaps,
The noblest and costliest cities . . . . others grading and building, and he domiciles there; Nothing for any one but what is for him . . . . near and far are for him,
The ships in the offing . . . . the perpetual shows and marches on land are for him if they
are for any body.
He puts things in their attitudes,
He puts today out of himself with plasticity and love, He places his own city, times, reminiscences, parents,
brothers and sisters, associations employment and politics, so that the rest never shame them afterward, nor assume to command them.
He is the answerer,
What can be answered he answers, and what cannot be answered he shows how it cannot
be answered.
A man is a summons and challenge,
It is vain to skulk . . . . Do you hear that mocking and laughter? Do you hear the ironical
echoes?
Books friendships philosophers priests action pleasure pride beat up and down seeking to give satisfaction;
He indicates the satisfaction, and indicates them that beat up and down also.
Whichever the sex . . . . whatever the season or place he may go freshly and gently and safely by day or by night,
He has the passkey of hearts . . . . to him the response of the prying of hands on the knobs.


His welcome is universal . . . . the flow of beauty is not more welcome or universal than he is,
The person he favors by day or sleeps with at night is blessed.
Every existence has its idiom . . . . every thing has an idiom and tongue;
He resolves all tongues into his own, and bestows it upon men . . and any man translates . .
and any man translates himself also:
One part does not counteract another part . . . . He is the joiner . . he sees how they join.
He says indifferently and alike, How are you friend? to the President at his levee, And he says Good day my brother, to Cudge that hoes in the sugarfield;
And both understand him and know that his speech is right.
He walks with perfect ease in the capitol,
He walks among the Congress . . . . and one representative says to another, Here is our
equal appearing and new.
Then the mechanics take him for a mechanic,
And the soldiers suppose him to be a captain . . . . and the sailors that he has followed the
sea,
And the authors take him for an author . . . . and the artists for an artist, And the laborers perceive he could labor with them and love them;
No matter what the work is, that he is one to follow it or has followed it, No matter what the nation, that he might find his brothers and sisters there.
The English believe he comes of their English stock,
A Jew to the Jew he seems . . . . a Russ to the Russ . . . . usual and near . . removed from
none.
Whoever he looks at in the traveler’s coffeehouse claims him,
The Italian or Frenchman is sure, and the German is sure, and the Spaniard is sure . . . .
and the island Cuban is sure.
The engineer, the deckhand on the great lakes or on the Mississippi or St Lawrence or Sacramento or Hudson or Delaware claims him.
The gentleman of perfect blood acknowledges his perfect blood,
The insulter, the prostitute, the angry person, the beggar, see themselves in the ways of him
. . . . he strangely transmutes them,
They are not vile any more . . . . they hardly know themselves, they are so grown.
You think it would be good to be the writer of melodious verses,
Well it would be good to be the writer of melodious verses;
But what are verses beyond the flowing character you could have? . . . . or beyond beautiful
manners and behaviour?


Or beyond one manly or affectionate deed of an apprenticeboy? . . or old woman? . . or man that has been in prison or is likely to be in prison?


[Europe the 72d and 73d Years of These States]
Suddenly out of its stale and drowsy lair, the lair of slaves,
Like lightning Europe le’pt forth . . . . half startled at itself,
Its feet upon the ashes and the rags . . . . Its hands tight to the throats of kings.
O hope and faith! O aching close of lives! O many a sickened heart! Turn back unto this day, and make yourselves afresh.
And you, paid to defile the People . . . . you liars mark:
Not for numberless agonies, murders, lusts,
For court thieving in its manifold mean forms,
Worming from his simplicity the poor man’s wages;
For many a promise sworn by royal lips, And broken, and laughed at in the breaking, Then in their power not for all these did the blows strike of personal revenge . . or the
heads of the nobles fall;
The People scorned the ferocity of kings.
But the sweetness of mercy brewed bitter destruction, and the frightened rulers come back: Each comes in state with his train . . . . hangman, priest and tax-gatherer . . . . soldier,
lawyer, jailer and sycophant.
Yet behind all, lo, a Shape,
Vague as the night, draped interminably, head front and form in scarlet folds, Whose face and eyes none may see,
Out of its robes only this . . . . the red robes, lifted by the arm,
One finger pointed high over the top, like the head of a snake appears.
Meanwhile corpses lie in new-made graves . . . . bloody corpses of young men:
The rope of the gibbet hangs heavily . . . . the bullets of princes are flying . . . . the creatures of power laugh aloud,
And all these things bear fruits . . . . and they are good.
Those corpses of young men,
Those martyrs that hang from the gibbets . . . . those hearts pierced by the gray lead, Cold and motionless as they seem . . live elsewhere with unslaughter’d vitality.
They live in other young men, O kings,
They live in brothers, again ready to defy you:
They were purified by death . . . . They were taught and exalted.
Not a grave of the murdered for freedom but grows seed for freedom . . . . in its turn to bear seed,
Which the winds carry afar and re-sow, and the rains and the snows nourish.


Not a disembodied spirit can the weapons of tyrants let loose,
But it stalks invisibly over the earth . . whispering counseling cautioning.
Liberty let others despair of you . . . . I never despair of you.
Is the house shut? Is the master away?
Nevertheless be ready . . . . be not weary of watching, He will soon return . . . . his messengers come anon.


[A Boston Ballad]
Clear the way there Jonathan!
Way for the President’s marshal! Way for the government cannon!
Way for the federal foot and dragoons . . . . and the phantoms afterward.
I rose this morning early to get betimes in Boston town;
Here’s a good place at the corner . . . . I must stand and see the show.
I love to look on the stars and stripes . . . . I hope the fifes will play Yankee Doodle.
How bright shine the foremost with cutlasses,
Every man holds his revolver . . . . marching stiff through Boston town.
A fog follows . . . . antiques of the same come limping,
Some appear wooden-legged and some appear bandaged and bloodless.
Why this is a show! It has called the dead out of the earth, The old graveyards of the hills have hurried to see; Uncountable phantoms gather by flank and rear of it,
Cocked hats of mothy mould and crutches made of mist, Arms in slings and old men leaning on young men’s shoulders.
What troubles you, Yankee phantoms? What is all this chattering of bare gums?
Does the ague convulse your limbs? Do you mistake your crutches for firelocks, and level
them?
If you blind your eyes with tears you will not see the President’s marshal, If you groan such groans you might balk the government cannon.
For shame old maniacs! . . . . Bring down those tossed arms, and let your white hair be; Here gape your smart grandsons . . . . their wives gaze at them from the windows,
See how well-dressed . . . . see how orderly they conduct themselves.
Worse and worse . . . . Can’t you stand it? Are you retreating? Is this hour with the living too dead for you?
Retreat then! Pell-mell! . . . . Back to the hills, old limpers!
I do not think you belong here anyhow.
But there is one thing that belongs here . . . . Shall I tell you what it is, gentlemen of
Boston?
I will whisper it to the Mayor . . . . he shall send a committee to England,
They shall get a grant from the Parliament, and go with a cart to the royal vault,
Dig out King George’s coffin . . . . unwrap him quick from the graveclothes . . . . box up his


bones for a journey:
Find a swift Yankee clipper . . . . here is freight for you blackbellied clipper,
Up with your anchor! shake out your sails! . . . . steer straight toward Boston bay.
Now call the President’s marshal again, and bring out the government cannon,
And fetch home the roarers from Congress, and make another procession and guard it
with foot and dragoons.
Here is a centrepiece for them:
Look! all orderly citizens . . . . look from the windows women.
The committee open the box and set up the regal ribs and glue those that will not stay, And clap the skull on top of the ribs, and clap a crown on top of the skull.
You have got your revenge old buster! . . . . The crown is come to its own and more than its own.
Stick your hands in your pockets Jonathan . . . . you are a made man from this day, You are mighty cute . . . . and here is one of your bargains.


[There Was a Child Went Forth]
There was a child went forth every day,
And the first object he looked upon and received with wonder or pity or love or dread, that
object he became,
And that object became part of him for the day or a certain part of the day . . . . or for
many years or stretching cycles of years.
The early lilacs became part of this child,
And grass, and white and red morningglories, and white and red clover, and the song of the
phoebe-bird,
And the March-born lambs, and the sow’s pink-faint litter, and the mare’s foal, and the
cow’s calf, and the noisy brood of the barnyard or by the mire of the pond-side . . and the fish suspending themselves so curiously below there . . and the beautiful curious liquid . . and the water-plants with their graceful flat heads . . all became part of him.
And the field-sprouts of April and May became part of him . . . . wintergrain sprouts, and those of the light-yellow corn, and of the esculent roots of the garden,
And the appletrees covered with blossoms, and the fruit afterward . . . . and woodberries . . and the commonest weeds by the road;
And the old drunkard staggering home from the outhouse of the tavern whence he had lately risen,
And the schoolmistress that passed on her way to the school . . and the friendly boys that passed . . and the quarrelsome boys . . and the tidy and freshcheeked girls . . and the barefoot negro boy and girl,
And all the changes of city and country wherever he went.
His own parents . . he that had propelled the fatherstuff at night, and fathered him . . and she that conceived him in her womb and birthed him . . . . they gave this child more of themselves than that,
They gave him afterward every day . . . . they and of them became part of him.
The mother at home quietly placing the dishes on the suppertable,
The mother with mild words . . . . clean her cap and gown . . . . a wholesome odor falling
off her person and clothes as she walks by:
The father, strong, selfsufficient, manly, mean, angered, unjust,
The blow, the quick loud word, the tight bargain, the crafty lure,
The family usages, the language, the company, the furniture . . . . the yearning and swelling
heart,
Affection that will not be gainsayed . . . . The sense of what is real . . . . the thought if after
all it should prove unreal,
The doubts of daytime and the doubts of nighttime . . . . the curious whether and how, Whether that which appears so is so . . . . Or is it all flashes and specks?
Men and women crowding fast in the streets . . if they are not flashes and specks what are


they?
The streets themselves, and the facades of houses . . . . the goods in the windows, Vehicles . . teams . . the tiered wharves, and the huge crossing at the ferries;
The village on the highland seen from afar at sunset . . . . the river between,
Shadows . . aureola and mist . . light falling on roofs and gables of white or brown, three
miles off,
The schooner near by sleepily dropping down the tide . . the little boat slacktowed astern, The hurrying tumbling waves and quickbroken crests and slapping;
The strata of colored clouds . . . . the long bar of maroontint away solitary by itself . . . . the
spread of purity it lies motionless in,
The horizon’s edge, the flying seacrow, the fragrance of saltmarsh and shoremud; These became part of that child who went forth every day, and who now goes and will
always go forth every day,
And these become of him or her that peruses them now.


[Who Learns My Lesson Complete]
Who learns my lesson complete?
Boss and journeyman and apprentice? . . . . churchman and atheist?
The stupid and the wise thinker . . . . parents and offspring . . . . merchant and clerk and
porter and customer . . . . editor, author, artist and schoolboy?
Draw nigh and commence,
It is no lesson . . . . it lets down the bars to a good lesson, And that to another . . . . and every one to another still.
The great laws take and effuse without argument,
I am of the same style, for I am their friend,
I love them quits and quits . . . . I do not halt and make salaams.
I lie abstracted and hear beautiful tales of things and the reasons of things, They are so beautiful I nudge myself to listen.
I cannot say to any person what I hear . . . . I cannot say it to myself . . . . it is very wonderful.
It is no little matter, this round and delicious globe, moving so exactly in its orbit forever and ever, without one jolt or the untruth of a single second;
I do not think it was made in six days, nor in ten thousand years, nor ten decillions of years,
Nor planned and built one thing after another, as an architect plans and builds a house.
I do not think seventy years is the time of a man or woman,
Nor that seventy millions of years is the time of a man or woman, Nor that years will ever stop the existence of me or any one else.
Is it wonderful that I should be immortal? as every one is immortal,
I know it is wonderful . . . . but my eyesight is equally wonderful . . . . and how I was
conceived in my mother’s womb is equally wonderful,
And how I was not palpable once but am now . . . . and was born on the last day of May
1819 . . . . and passed from a babe in the creeping trance of three summers and three winters to articulate and walk . . . . are all equally wonderful.
And that I grew six feet high . . . . and that I have become a man thirty-six years old in 1855 . . . . and that I am here anyhow—are all equally wonderful;
And that my soul embraces you this hour, and we affect each other without ever seeing each other, and never perhaps to see each other, is every bit as wonderful:
And that I can think such thoughts as these is just as wonderful,
And that I can remind you, and you think them and know them to be true is just as
wonderful,
And that the moon spins round the earth and on with the earth is equally wonderful,


And that they balance themselves with the sun and stars is equally wonderful.
Come I should like to hear you tell me what there is in yourself that is not just as wonderful,
And I should like to hear the name of anything between Sunday morning and Saturday night that is not just as wonderful.


[Great Are the Myths]
Great are the myths . . . . I too delight in them,
Great are Adam and Eve . . . . I too look back and accept them;
Great the risen and fallen nations, and their poets, women, sages, inventors, rulers, warriors
and priests.
Great is liberty! Great is equality! I am their follower,
Helmsmen of nations, choose your craft . . . . where you sail I sail,
Yours is the muscle of life or death . . . . yours is the perfect science . . . . in you I have
absolute faith.
Great is today, and beautiful,
It is good to live in this age . . . . there never was any better.
Great are the plunges and throes and triumphs and falls of democracy, Great the reformers with their lapses and screams,
Great the daring and venture of sailors on new explorations.
Great are yourself and myself,
We are just as good and bad as the oldest and youngest or any, What the best and worst did we could do,
What they felt . . do not we feel it in ourselves?
What they wished . . do we not wish the same?
Great is youth, and equally great is old age . . . . great are the day and night; Great is wealth and great is poverty . . . . great is expression and great is silence.
Youth large lusty and loving . . . . youth full of grace and force and fascination,
Do you know that old age may come after you with equal grace and force and fascination?
Day fullblown and splendid . . . . day of the immense sun, and action and ambition and laughter,
The night follows close, with millions of suns, and sleep and restoring darkness.
Wealth with the flush hand and fine clothes and hospitality:
But then the soul’s wealth—which is candor and knowledge and pride and enfolding love: Who goes for men and women showing poverty richer than wealth?
Expression of speech . . in what is written or said forget not that silence is also expressive, That anguish as hot as the hottest and contempt as cold as the coldest may be without
words,
That the true adoration is likewise without words and without kneeling.
Great is the greatest nation . . the nation of clusters of equal nations.


Great is the earth, and the way it became what it is,
Do you imagine it is stopped at this? . . . . and the increase abandoned?
Understand then that it goes as far onward from this as this is from the times when it lay in
covering waters and gases.
Great is the quality of truth in man,
The quality of truth in man supports itself through all changes,
It is inevitably in the man . . . . He and it are in love, and never leave each other.
The truth in man is no dictum . . . . it is vital as eyesight,
If there be any soul there is truth . . . . if there be man or woman there is truth . . . . If there
be physical or moral there is truth,
If there be equilibrium or volition there is truth . . . . if there be things at all upon the earth
there is truth.
O truth of the earth! O truth of things! I am determined to press the whole way toward you, Sound your voice! I scale mountains or dive in the sea after you.
Great is language . . . . it is the mightiest of the sciences,
It is the fulness and color and form and diversity of the earth . . . . and of men and women
. . . . and of all qualities and processes;
It is greater than wealth . . . . it is greater than buildings or ships or religions or paintings or
music.
Great is the English speech . . . . What speech is so great as the English?
Great is the English brood . . . . What brood has so vast a destiny as the English?
It is the mother of the brood that must rule the earth with the new rule,
The new rule shall rule as the soul rules, and as the love and justice and equality that are in
the soul rule.
Great is the law . . . . Great are the old few landmarks of the law . . . . they are the same in all times and shall not be disturbed.
Great are marriage, commerce, newspapers, books, freetrade, railroads, steamers, international mails and telegraphs and exchanges.
Great is Justice;
Justice is not settled by legislators and laws . . . . it is in the soul,
It cannot be varied by statutes any more than love or pride or the attraction of gravity can, It is immutable . . it does not depend on majorities . . . . majorities or what not come at last
before the same passionless and exact tribunal.
For justice are the grand natural lawyers and perfect judges . . . . it is in their souls,
It is well assorted . . . . they have not studied for nothing . . . . the great includes the less, They rule on the highest grounds . . . . they oversee all eras and states and administrations.
The perfect judge fears nothing . . . . he could go front to front before God,


Before the perfect judge all shall stand back . . . . life and death shall stand back . . . . heaven and hell shall stand back.
Great is goodness;
I do not know what it is any more than I know what health is . . . . but I know it is great.
Great is wickedness . . . . I find I often admire it just as much as I admire goodness: Do you call that a paradox? It certainly is a paradox.
The eternal equilibrium of things is great, and the eternal overthrow of things is great, And there is another paradox.
Great is life . . and real and mystical . . wherever and whoever,
Great is death . . . . Sure as life holds all parts together, death holds all parts together; Sure as the stars return again after they merge in the light, death is great as life.

I come from haunts of coot and hern,
   I make a sudden sally
And sparkle out among the fern,
   To bicker down a valley.

By thirty hills I hurry down,
   Or slip between the ridges,
By twenty thorpes, a little town,
   And half a hundred bridges.

Till last by Philip's farm I flow
   To join the brimming river,
For men may come and men may go,
   But I go on for ever.

I chatter over stony ways,
   In little sharps and trebles,
I bubble into eddying bays,
   I babble on the pebbles.

With many a curve my banks I fret
   By many a field and fallow,
And many a fairy foreland set
   With willow-weed and mallow.

I chatter, chatter, as I flow
   To join the brimming river,
For men may come and men may go,
   But I go on for ever.

I wind about, and in and out,
   With here a blossom sailing,
And here and there a lusty trout,
   And here and there a grayling,

And here and there a foamy flake
   Upon me, as I travel
With many a silvery waterbreak
   Above the golden gravel,

And draw them all along, and flow
   To join the brimming river
For men may come and men may go,
   But I go on for ever.

I steal by lawns and grassy plots,
   I slide by hazel covers;
I move the sweet forget-me-nots
   That grow for happy lovers.

I slip, I slide, I gloom, I glance,
   Among my skimming swallows;
I make the netted sunbeam dance
   Against my sandy shallows.

I murmur under moon and stars
   In brambly wildernesses;
I linger by my shingly bars;
   I loiter round my cresses;

And out again I curve and flow
   To join the brimming river,
For men may come and men may go,
   But I go on for ever.
It little profits that an idle king, 
By this still hearth, among these barren crags, 
Match'd with an aged wife, I mete and dole 
Unequal laws unto a savage race, 
That hoard, and sleep, and feed, and know not me. 
I cannot rest from travel: I will drink 
Life to the lees: All times I have enjoy'd 
Greatly, have suffer'd greatly, both with those 
That loved me, and alone, on shore, and when 
Thro' scudding drifts the rainy Hyades 
Vext the dim sea: I am become a name; 
For always roaming with a hungry heart 
Much have I seen and known; cities of men 
And manners, climates, councils, governments, 
Myself not least, but honour'd of them all; 
And drunk delight of battle with my peers, 
Far on the ringing plains of windy Troy. 
I am a part of all that I have met; 
Yet all experience is an arch wherethro' 
Gleams that untravell'd world whose margin fades 
For ever and forever when I move. 
How dull it is to pause, to make an end, 
To rust unburnish'd, not to shine in use! 
As tho' to breathe were life! Life piled on life 
Were all too little, and of one to me 
Little remains: but every hour is saved 
From that eternal silence, something more, 
A bringer of new things; and vile it were 
For some three suns to store and hoard myself, 
And this gray spirit yearning in desire 
To follow knowledge like a sinking star, 
Beyond the utmost bound of human thought. 

         This is my son, mine own Telemachus, 
To whom I leave the sceptre and the isle,— 
Well-loved of me, discerning to fulfil 
This labour, by slow prudence to make mild 
A rugged people, and thro' soft degrees 
Subdue them to the useful and the good. 
Most blameless is he, centred in the sphere 
Of common duties, decent not to fail 
In offices of tenderness, and pay 
Meet adoration to my household gods, 
When I am gone. He works his work, I mine. 

         There lies the port; the vessel puffs her sail: 
There gloom the dark, broad seas. My mariners, 
Souls that have toil'd, and wrought, and thought with me— 
That ever with a frolic welcome took 
The thunder and the sunshine, and opposed 
Free hearts, free foreheads—you and I are old; 
Old age hath yet his honour and his toil; 
Death closes all: but something ere the end, 
Some work of noble note, may yet be done, 
Not unbecoming men that strove with Gods. 
The lights begin to twinkle from the rocks: 
The long day wanes: the slow moon climbs: the deep 
Moans round with many voices. Come, my friends, 
'T is not too late to seek a newer world. 
Push off, and sitting well in order smite 
The sounding furrows; for my purpose holds 
To sail beyond the sunset, and the baths 
Of all the western stars, until I die. 
It may be that the gulfs will wash us down: 
It may be we shall touch the Happy Isles, 
And see the great Achilles, whom we knew. 
Tho' much is taken, much abides; and tho' 
We are not now that strength which in old days 
Moved earth and heaven, that which we are, we are; 
One equal temper of heroic hearts, 
Made weak by time and fate, but strong in will 
To strive, to seek, to find, and not to yield.

An ancient Mariner meeteth three Gallants bidden to a wedding-feast, and detaineth one.
It is an ancient Mariner,
And he stoppeth one of three.
`By thy long beard and glittering eye, Now wherefore stopp'st thou me ?
The Bridegroom's doors are opened wide, And I am next of kin ;
The guests are met, the feast is set : May'st hear the merry din.'
He holds him with his skinny hand, `There was a ship,' quoth he.
`Hold off ! unhand me, grey-beard loon !’
Eftsoons his hand dropt he.
He holds him with his glittering eye-- The Wedding-Guest stood still,
And listens like a three years' child : The Mariner hath his will.
The Wedding-Guest sat on a stone : He cannot choose but hear ;
And thus spake on that ancient man, The bright-eyed Mariner.
`The ship was cheered, the harbour cleared, Merrily did we drop
Below the kirk, below the hill,
Below the lighthouse top.
The Mariner tells how the ship sailed southward with a good wind and fair weather, till it reached the Line.
The Sun came up upon the left,
Out of the sea came he !
And he shone bright, and on the right Went down into the sea.
Higher and higher every day,
Till over the mast at noon--'
The Wedding-Guest here beat his breast, For he heard the loud bassoon.
The Wedding-Guest heareth the bridal music ; but the Mariner continueth his tale.
The bride hath paced into the hall, Red as a rose is she ;
Nodding their heads before her goes The merry minstrelsy.
The Wedding-Guest he beat his breast, Yet he cannot choose but hear ;
And thus spake on that ancient man, The bright-eyed Mariner.
The ship driven by a storm toward the south pole.
`And now the STORM-BLAST came, and he Was tyrannous and strong :
He struck with his o'ertaking wings,
And chased us south along.
With sloping masts and dipping prow, As who pursued with yell and blow Still treads the shadow of his foe, And forward bends his head,
The ship drove fast, loud roared the blast, The southward aye we fled.
And now there came both mist and snow, And it grew wondrous cold :
And ice, mast-high, came floating by,
As green as emerald.
The land of ice, and of fearful sounds where no living thing was to be seen.
And through the drifts the snowy clifts Did send a dismal sheen :
Nor shapes of men nor beasts we ken-- The ice was all between.
The ice was here, the ice was there,
The ice was all around :
It cracked and growled, and roared and howled, Like noises in a swound !
Till a great sea-bird, called the Albatross, came through the snow-fog, and was received with great joy and hospitality.
At length did cross an Albatross, Thorough the fog it came ;
As if it had been a Christian soul, We hailed it in God's name.
It ate the food it ne'er had eat,
And round and round it flew.
The ice did split with a thunder-fit ; The helmsman steered us through !
And lo ! the Albatross proveth a bird of good omen, and followeth the ship as it returned northward through fog and floating ice.
And a good south wind sprung up behind ; The Albatross did follow,
And every day, for food or play,
Came to the mariner's hollo !
In mist or cloud, on mast or shroud,
It perched for vespers nine ;
Whiles all the night, through fog-smoke white, Glimmered the white Moon-shine.'
The ancient Mariner inhospitably killeth the pious bird of good omen.
`God save thee, ancient Mariner !
From the fiends, that plague thee thus !-- Why look'st thou so ?'--With my cross-bow I shot the ALBATROSS.
PART II
The Sun now rose upon the right : Out of the sea came he,
Still hid in mist, and on the left Went down into the sea.
And the good south wind still blew behind, But no sweet bird did follow,
Nor any day for food or play
Came to the mariners' hollo !
His shipmates cry out against the ancient Mariner, for killing the bird of good luck.
And I had done an hellish thing, And it would work 'em woe :
For all averred, I had killed the bird That made the breeze to blow.
Ah wretch ! said they, the bird to slay, That made the breeze to blow !
But when the fog cleared off, they justify the same, and thus make themselves accomplices in the crime.
Nor dim nor red, like God's own head, The glorious Sun uprist :
Then all averred, I had killed the bird That brought the fog and mist.
'Twas right, said they, such birds to slay, That bring the fog and mist.
The fair breeze continues ; the ship enters the Pacific Ocean, and sails northward, even till it reaches the Line.
The fair breeze blew, the white foam flew, The furrow followed free ;
We were the first that ever burst
Into that silent sea.
The ship hath been suddenly becalmed.
Down dropt the breeze, the sails dropt down, 'Twas sad as sad could be ;
And we did speak only to break
The silence of the sea !
All in a hot and copper sky,
The bloody Sun, at noon,
Right up above the mast did stand, No bigger than the Moon.
Day after day, day after day,
We stuck, nor breath nor motion ; As idle as a painted ship
Upon a painted ocean.
And the Albatross begins to be avenged.
Water, water, every where, And all the boards did shrink ; Water, water, every where, Nor any drop to drink.
The very deep did rot : O Christ !
 -2-
That ever this should be !
Yea, slimy things did crawl with legs Upon the slimy sea.
About, about, in reel and rout The death-fires danced at night ; The water, like a witch's oils, Burnt green, and blue and white.
A Spirit had followed them ; one of the invisible inhabitants of this planet, neither departed souls nor angels ; concerning whom the learned Jew, Josephus, and the Platonic Constantinopolitan, Michael Psellus, may be consulted. They are very numerous, and there is no climate or element without one or more.
And some in dreams assuréd were Of the Spirit that plagued us so ; Nine fathom deep he had followed us From the land of mist and snow.
And every tongue, through utter drought, Was withered at the root ;
We could not speak, no more than if
We had been choked with soot.
The shipmates, in their sore distress, would fain throw the whole guilt on the ancient Mariner : in sign whereof they hang the dead sea-bird round his neck.
Ah ! well a-day ! what evil looks Had I from old and young ! Instead of the cross, the Albatross About my neck was hung.
PART III
There passed a weary time. Each throat Was parched, and glazed each eye.
A weary time ! a weary time !
How glazed each weary eye,
When looking westward, I beheld A something in the sky.
The ancient Mariner beholdeth a sign in the element afar off.
At first it seemed a little speck,
And then it seemed a mist ;
It moved and moved, and took at last A certain shape, I wist.
A speck, a mist, a shape, I wist ! And still it neared and neared : As if it dodged a water-sprite,
It plunged and tacked and veered.
At its nearer approach, it seemeth him to be a ship ; and at a dear ransom he freeth his speech from the bonds of thirst.
With throats unslaked, with black lips baked, We could nor laugh nor wail ;
Through utter drought all dumb we stood !
I bit my arm, I sucked the blood,
And cried, A sail ! a sail !
A flash of joy ;
With throats unslaked, with black lips baked, Agape they heard me call :
Gramercy ! they for joy did grin,
And all at once their breath drew in,
As they were drinking all.
And horror follows. For can it be a ship that comes onward without wind or tide ?
See ! see ! (I cried) she tacks no more ! Hither to work us weal ;
Without a breeze, without a tide,
She steadies with upright keel !
The western wave was all a-flame.
The day was well nigh done !
Almost upon the western wave
Rested the broad bright Sun ;
When that strange shape drove suddenly Betwixt us and the Sun.
It seemeth him but the skeleton of a ship.
And straight the Sun was flecked with bars, (Heaven's Mother send us grace !)
As if through a dungeon-grate he peered With broad and burning face.
And its ribs are seen as bars on the face of the setting Sun.
Alas ! (thought I, and my heart beat loud) How fast she nears and nears !
Are those her sails that glance in the Sun, Like restless gossameres ?
The Spectre-Woman and her Death-mate, and no other on board the skeleton ship.
And those her ribs through which the Sun Did peer, as through a grate ?
And is that Woman all her crew ?
Is that a DEATH ? and are there two ?
Is DEATH that woman's mate ?
[first version of this stanza through the end of Part III]
 -3-

Like vessel, like crew !
PART IV
The Wedding-Guest feareth that a Spirit is talking to him ;
`I fear thee, ancient Mariner !
I fear thy skinny hand !
And thou art long, and lank, and brown, As is the ribbed sea-sand.
(Coleridge's note on above stanza)
I fear thee and thy glittering eye,
And thy skinny hand, so brown.'--
Fear not, fear not, thou Wedding-Guest ! This body dropt not down.
But the ancient Mariner assureth him of his bodily life, and proceedeth to relate his horrible penance.
Alone, alone, all, all alone, Alone on a wide wide sea ! And never a saint took pity on My soul in agony.
He despiseth the creatures of the calm,
The many men, so beautiful !
And they all dead did lie :
And a thousand thousand slimy things Lived on ; and so did I.
And envieth that they should live, and so many lie dead.
I looked upon the rotting sea, And drew my eyes away ;
I looked upon the rotting deck, And there the dead men lay.
I looked to heaven, and tried to pray ; But or ever a prayer had gusht,
A wicked whisper came, and made My heart as dry as dust.
I closed my lids, and kept them close,
And the balls like pulses beat ;
For the sky and the sea, and the sea and the sky Lay like a load on my weary eye,
And the dead were at my feet.
But the curse liveth for him in the eye of the dead men.
The cold sweat melted from their limbs, Nor rot nor reek did they :
The look with which they looked on me Had never passed away.
An orphan's curse would drag to hell A spirit from on high ;
But oh ! more horrible than that
Is the curse in a dead man's eye !
 Her lips were red, her looks were free,
Her locks were yellow as gold :
Her skin was as white as leprosy,
The Night-mare LIFE-IN-DEATH was she, Who thicks man's blood with cold.
Death and Life-in-Death have diced for the ship's crew, and she (the latter) winneth the ancient Mariner.
The naked hulk alongside came,
And the twain were casting dice ;
`The game is done ! I've won ! I've won !' Quoth she, and whistles thrice.
No twilight within the courts of the Sun.
The Sun's rim dips ; the stars rush out : At one stride comes the dark ;
With far-heard whisper, o'er the sea, Off shot the spectre-bark.
At the rising of the Moon,
We listened and looked sideways up !
Fear at my heart, as at a cup,
My life-blood seemed to sip !
The stars were dim, and thick the night,
The steerman's face by his lamp gleamed white ; From the sails the dew did drip--
Till clomb above the eastern bar
The hornéd Moon, with one bright star Within the nether tip.
One after another,
One after one, by the star-dogged Moon, Too quick for groan or sigh,
Each turned his face with a ghastly pang, And cursed me with his eye.
His shipmates drop down dead.
Four times fifty living men,
(And I heard nor sigh nor groan) With heavy thump, a lifeless lump, They dropped down one by one.
But Life-in-Death begins her work on the ancient Mariner.
The souls did from their bodies fly,-- They fled to bliss or woe !
And every soul, it passed me by, Like the whizz of my cross-bow !
-4-

Seven days, seven nights, I saw that curse, And yet I could not die.
In his loneliness and fixedness he yearneth towards the journeying Moon, and the stars that still sojourn, yet still move onward ; and every where the blue sky belongs to them, and is their appointed rest, and their native country and their own natural homes, which they enter unannounced, as lords that are certainly expected and yet there is a silent joy at their arrival.
The moving Moon went up the sky, And no where did abide :
Softly she was going up,
And a star or two beside--
Her beams bemocked the sultry main, Like April hoar-frost spread ;
But where the ship's huge shadow lay, The charméd water burnt alway
A still and awful red.
By the light of the Moon he beholdeth God's creatures of the great calm.
Beyond the shadow of the ship,
I watched the water-snakes :
They moved in tracks of shining white, And when they reared, the elfish light Fell off in hoary flakes.
Within the shadow of the ship
I watched their rich attire :
Blue, glossy green, and velvet black, They coiled and swam ; and every track Was a flash of golden fire.
Their beauty and their happiness.
He blesseth them in his heart.
O happy living things ! no tongue Their beauty might declare :
A spring of love gushed from my heart, And I blessed them unaware :
Sure my kind saint took pity on me, And I blessed them unaware.
The spell begins to break.
The self-same moment I could pray ; And from my neck so free
The Albatross fell off, and sank Like lead into the sea.
PART V
Oh sleep ! it is a gentle thing, Beloved from pole to pole !
To Mary Queen the praise be given !
She sent the gentle sleep from Heaven, That slid into my soul.
By grace of the holy Mother, the ancient Mariner is refreshed with rain.
The silly buckets on the deck,
That had so long remained,
I dreamt that they were filled with dew ; And when I awoke, it rained.
My lips were wet, my throat was cold, My garments all were dank ;
Sure I had drunken in my dreams, And still my body drank.
I moved, and could not feel my limbs : I was so light--almost
I thought that I had died in sleep,
And was a blesséd ghost.
He heareth sounds and seeth strange sights and commotions in the sky and the element.
And soon I heard a roaring wind : It did not come anear ;
But with its sound it shook the sails, That were so thin and sere.
The upper air burst into life !
And a hundred fire-flags sheen,
To and fro they were hurried about ! And to and fro, and in and out,
The wan stars danced between.
And the coming wind did roar more loud,
And the sails did sigh like sedge ;
And the rain poured down from one black cloud ; The Moon was at its edge.
The thick black cloud was cleft, and still The Moon was at its side :
Like waters shot from some high crag, The lightning fell with never a jag,
A river steep and wide.
The bodies of the ship's crew are inspired, and the ship moves on ;
The loud wind never reached the ship, Yet now the ship moved on !
Beneath the lightning and the Moon The dead men gave a groan.
They groaned, they stirred, they all uprose, Nor spake, nor moved their eyes ;
It had been strange, even in a dream,
To have seen those dead men rise.
The helmsman steered, the ship moved on ;
 -5-

Yet never a breeze up-blew ;
The mariners all 'gan work the ropes, Where they were wont to do ;
They raised their limbs like lifeless tools-- We were a ghastly crew.
The body of my brother's son Stood by me, knee to knee :
The body and I pulled at one rope, But he said nought to me.
But not by the souls of the men, nor by dæmons of earth or middle air, but by a blessed troop of angelic spirits, sent down by the invocation of the guardian saint.
`I fear thee, ancient Mariner !'
Be calm, thou Wedding-Guest ! 'Twas not those souls that fled in pain, Which to their corses came again,
But a troop of spirits blest :
For when it dawned--they dropped their arms, And clustered round the mast ;
Sweet sounds rose slowly through their mouths, And from their bodies passed.
Around, around, flew each sweet sound, Then darted to the Sun ;
Slowly the sounds came back again, Now mixed, now one by one.
Sometimes a-dropping from the sky
I heard the sky-lark sing ;
Sometimes all little birds that are, How they seemed to fill the sea and air With their sweet jargoning !
And now 'twas like all instruments, Now like a lonely flute ;
And now it is an angel's song,
That makes the heavens be mute.
It ceased ; yet still the sails made on A pleasant noise till noon,
A noise like of a hidden brook
In the leafy month of June,
That to the sleeping woods all night Singeth a quiet tune.
[Additional stanzas, dropped after the first edition.]
Till noon we quietly sailed on,
Yet never a breeze did breathe : Slowly and smoothly went the ship, Moved onward from beneath.
The lonesome Spirit from the south-pole carries on the ship as far as the Line, in obedience to the angelic troop, but still requireth vengeance.
Under the keel nine fathom deep, From the land of mist and snow, The spirit slid : and it was he That made the ship to go.
The sails at noon left off their tune, And the ship stood still also.
The Sun, right up above the mast,
Had fixed her to the ocean :
But in a minute she 'gan stir,
With a short uneasy motion-- Backwards and forwards half her length With a short uneasy motion.
Then like a pawing horse let go, She made a sudden bound :
It flung the blood into my head, And I fell down in a swound.
The Polar Spirit's fellow-dæmons, the invisible inhabitants of the element, take part in his wrong ; and two of them relate, one to the other, that penance long and heavy for the ancient Mariner hath been accorded to the Polar Spirit, who returneth southward.
How long in that same fit I lay,
I have not to declare ;
But ere my living life returned,
I heard and in my soul discerned Two voices in the air.
`Is it he ?' quoth one, `Is this the man ? By him who died on cross,
With his cruel bow he laid full low The harmless Albatross.
The spirit who bideth by himself
In the land of mist and snow,
He loved the bird that loved the man Who shot him with his bow.'
The other was a softer voice,
As soft as honey-dew :
Quoth he, `The man hath penance done, And penance more will do.'
PART VI
FIRST VOICE
`But tell me, tell me ! speak again,
Thy soft response renewing--
What makes that ship drive on so fast ? What is the ocean doing ?'
SECOND VOICE
`Still as a slave before his lord, The ocean hath no blast ;
His great bright eye most silently Up to the Moon is cast--
 -6-

If he may know which way to go ; For she guides him smooth or grim. See, brother, see ! how graciously She looketh down on him.'
The Mariner hath been cast into a trance ; for the angelic power causeth the vessel to drive northward faster than human life could endure.
FIRST VOICE
`But why drives on that ship so fast, Without or wave or wind ?'
SECOND VOICE
`The air is cut away before, And closes from behind.
Fly, brother, fly ! more high, more high ! Or we shall be belated :
For slow and slow that ship will go, When the Mariner's trance is abated.'
The supernatural motion is retarded ; the Mariner awakes, and his penance begins anew.
I woke, and we were sailing on
As in a gentle weather :
'Twas night, calm night, the moon was high ; The dead men stood together.
All stood together on the deck, For a charnel-dungeon fitter : All fixed on me their stony eyes, That in the Moon did glitter.
The pang, the curse, with which they died, Had never passed away :
I could not draw my eyes from theirs,
Nor turn them up to pray.
The curse is finally expiated.
And now this spell was snapt : once more I viewed the ocean green,
And looked far forth, yet little saw
Of what had else been seen--
Like one, that on a lonesome road
Doth walk in fear and dread,
And having once turned round walks on, And turns no more his head ;
Because he knows, a frightful fiend Doth close behind him tread.
But soon there breathed a wind on me, Nor sound nor motion made :
Its path was not upon the sea,
In ripple or in shade.
It raised my hair, it fanned my cheek Like a meadow-gale of spring--
It mingled strangely with my fears, Yet it felt like a welcoming.
Swiftly, swiftly flew the ship,
Yet she sailed softly too :
Sweetly, sweetly blew the breeze-- On me alone it blew.
And the ancient Mariner beholdeth his native country.
Oh ! dream of joy ! is this indeed The light-house top I see ?
Is this the hill ? is this the kirk ? Is this mine own countree ?
We drifted o'er the harbour-bar, And I with sobs did pray--
O let me be awake, my God ! Or let me sleep alway.
The harbour-bay was clear as glass, So smoothly it was strewn !
And on the bay the moonlight lay, And the shadow of the Moon.
[Additional stanzas, dropped after the first edition.]
The rock shone bright, the kirk no less, That stands above the rock :
The moonlight steeped in silentness The steady weathercock.
The angelic spirits leave the dead bodies,
And the bay was white with silent light, Till rising from the same,
Full many shapes, that shadows were, In crimson colours came.
And appear in their own forms of light.
A little distance from the prow Those crimson shadows were :
I turned my eyes upon the deck-- Oh, Christ ! what saw I there !
Each corse lay flat, lifeless and flat, And, by the holy rood !
A man all light, a seraph-man,
On every corse there stood.
This seraph-band, each waved his hand : It was a heavenly sight !
They stood as signals to the land,
Each one a lovely light ;
This seraph-band, each waved his hand,
-7-

No voice did they impart--
No voice ; but oh ! the silence sank Like music on my heart.
But soon I heard the dash of oars,
I heard the Pilot's cheer ;
My head was turned perforce away And I saw a boat appear.
[Additional stanza, dropped after the first edition.]
The Pilot and the Pilot's boy,
I heard them coming fast :
Dear Lord in Heaven ! it was a joy The dead men could not blast.
I saw a third--I heard his voice : It is the Hermit good !
He singeth loud his godly hymns That he makes in the wood.
He'll shrieve my soul, he'll wash away The Albatross's blood.
PART VII
The Hermit of the Wood,
This Hermit good lives in that wood Which slopes down to the sea.
How loudly his sweet voice he rears ! He loves to talk with marineres
That come from a far countree.
He kneels at morn, and noon, and eve-- He hath a cushion plump :
It is the moss that wholly hides
The rotted old oak-stump.
The skiff-boat neared : I heard them talk, `Why, this is strange, I trow !
Where are those lights so many and fair, That signal made but now ?'
Approacheth the ship with wonder.
`Strange, by my faith !' the Hermit said--
`And they answered not our cheer !
The planks looked warped ! and see those sails, How thin they are and sere !
I never saw aught like to them,
Unless perchance it were
Brown skeletons of leaves that lag
My forest-brook along ;
When the ivy-tod is heavy with snow, And the owlet whoops to the wolf below, That eats the she-wolf's young.'
`Dear Lord ! it hath a fiendish look-- (The Pilot made reply)
I am a-feared'--`Push on, push on !'
Said the Hermit cheerily.
The boat came closer to the ship,
But I nor spake nor stirred ;
The boat came close beneath the ship, And straight a sound was heard.
The ship suddenly sinketh.
Under the water it rumbled on, Still louder and more dread :
It reached the ship, it split the bay ; The ship went down like lead.
The ancient Mariner is saved in the Pilot's boat.
Stunned by that loud and dreadful sound, Which sky and ocean smote,
Like one that hath been seven days drowned My body lay afloat ;
But swift as dreams, myself I found Within the Pilot's boat.
Upon the whirl, where sank the ship, The boat spun round and round ; And all was still, save that the hill Was telling of the sound.
I moved my lips--the Pilot shrieked And fell down in a fit ;
The holy Hermit raised his eyes, And prayed where he did sit.
I took the oars : the Pilot's boy,
Who now doth crazy go,
Laughed loud and long, and all the while His eyes went to and fro.
`Ha ! ha !' quoth he, `full plain I see,
The Devil knows how to row.'
And now, all in my own countree,
I stood on the firm land !
The Hermit stepped forth from the boat, And scarcely he could stand.
The ancient Mariner earnestly entreateth the Hermit to shrieve him ; and the penance of life falls on him.
`O shrieve me, shrieve me, holy man !' The Hermit crossed his brow.
`Say quick,' quoth he, `I bid thee say-- What manner of man art thou ?'
Forthwith this frame of mine was wrenched With a woful agony,
Which forced me to begin my tale ;
And then it left me free.
 -8-

And ever and anon through out his future life an agony constraineth him to travel from land to land ;
Since then, at an uncertain hour, That agony returns :
And till my ghastly tale is told, This heart within me burns.
I pass, like night, from land to land ; I have strange power of speech ; That moment that his face I see,
I know the man that must hear me : To him my tale I teach.
What loud uproar bursts from that door ! The wedding-guests are there :
But in the garden-bower the bride
And bride-maids singing are :
And hark the little vesper bell, Which biddeth me to prayer !
O Wedding-Guest ! this soul hath been Alone on a wide wide sea :
So lonely 'twas, that God himself Scarce seeméd there to be.
O sweeter than the marriage-feast, 'Tis sweeter far to me,
To walk together to the kirk
With a goodly company !--
To walk together to the kirk,
And all together pray,
While each to his great Father bends, Old men, and babes, and loving friends And youths and maidens gay !
And to teach, by his own example, love and reverence to all things that God made and loveth.
Farewell, farewell ! but this I tell To thee, thou Wedding-Guest ! He prayeth well, who loveth well Both man and bird and beast.
He prayeth best, who loveth best All things both great and small ; For the dear God who loveth us, He made and loveth all.
The Mariner, whose eye is bright, Whose beard with age is hoar,
Is gone : and now the Wedding-Guest Turned from the bridegroom's door.
He went like one that hath been stunned, And is of sense forlorn :
A sadder and a wiser man,
He rose the morrow morn.

Behold her, single in the field, 
Yon solitary Highland Lass! 
Reaping and singing by herself; 
Stop here, or gently pass! 
Alone she cuts and binds the grain, 
And sings a melancholy strain; 
O listen! for the Vale profound 
Is overflowing with the sound. 

No Nightingale did ever chaunt 
More welcome notes to weary bands 
Of travellers in some shady haunt, 
Among Arabian sands: 
A voice so thrilling ne'er was heard 
In spring-time from the Cuckoo-bird, 
Breaking the silence of the seas 
Among the farthest Hebrides. 

Will no one tell me what she sings?— 
Perhaps the plaintive numbers flow 
For old, unhappy, far-off things, 
And battles long ago: 
Or is it some more humble lay, 
Familiar matter of to-day? 
Some natural sorrow, loss, or pain, 
That has been, and may be again? 

Whate'er the theme, the Maiden sang 
As if her song could have no ending; 
I saw her singing at her work, 
And o'er the sickle bending;— 
I listened, motionless and still; 
And, as I mounted up the hill, 
The music in my heart I bore, 
Long after it was heard no more. 
She walks in beauty, like the night 
Of cloudless climes and starry skies; 
And all that’s best of dark and bright 
Meet in her aspect and her eyes; 
Thus mellowed to that tender light 
Which heaven to gaudy day denies. 

One shade the more, one ray the less, 
Had half impaired the nameless grace 
Which waves in every raven tress, 
Or softly lightens o’er her face; 
Where thoughts serenely sweet express, 
How pure, how dear their dwelling-place. 

And on that cheek, and o’er that brow, 
So soft, so calm, yet eloquent, 
The smiles that win, the tints that glow, 
But tell of days in goodness spent, 
A mind at peace with all below, 
A heart whose love is innocent!

Shall I compare thee to a summer’s day?
Thou art more lovely and more temperate.
Rough winds do shake the darling buds of May,
And summer’s lease hath all too short a date.
Sometime too hot the eye of heaven shines,
And often is his gold complexion dimmed;
And every fair from fair sometime declines,
By chance, or nature’s changing course, untrimmed;
But thy eternal summer shall not fade,
Nor lose possession of that fair thou ow’st,
Nor shall death brag thou wand'rest in his shade,
When in eternal lines to Time thou grow'st.
    So long as men can breathe, or eyes can see,
    So long lives this, and this gives life to thee.

Let me not to the marriage of true minds 
Admit impediments. Love is not love 
Which alters when it alteration finds, 
Or bends with the remover to remove. 
O no! it is an ever-fixed mark 
That looks on tempests and is never shaken; 
It is the star to every wand'ring bark, 
Whose worth's unknown, although his height be taken. 
Love's not Time's fool, though rosy lips and cheeks 
Within his bending sickle's compass come; 
Love alters not with his brief hours and weeks, 
But bears it out even to the edge of doom. 
If this be error and upon me prov'd, 
I never writ, nor no man ever lov’d.



Do not go gentle into that good night,
Old age should burn and rave at close of day;
Rage, rage against the dying of the light.

Though wise men at their end know dark is right,
Because their words had forked no lightning they
Do not go gentle into that good night.

Good men, the last wave by, crying how bright
Their frail deeds might have danced in a green bay,
Rage, rage against the dying of the light.

Wild men who caught and sang the sun in flight,
And learn, too late, they grieved it on its way,
Do not go gentle into that good night.

Grave men, near death, who see with blinding sight
Blind eyes could blaze like meteors and be gay,
Rage, rage against the dying of the light.

And you, my father, there on the sad height,
Curse, bless, me now with your fierce tears, I pray.
Do not go gentle into that good night.
Rage, rage against the dying of the light.

If you can keep your head when all about you   
    Are losing theirs and blaming it on you,   
If you can trust yourself when all men doubt you,
    But make allowance for their doubting too;   
If you can wait and not be tired by waiting,
    Or being lied about, don’t deal in lies,
Or being hated, don’t give way to hating,
    And yet don’t look too good, nor talk too wise:

If you can dream—and not make dreams your master;   
    If you can think—and not make thoughts your aim;   
If you can meet with Triumph and Disaster
    And treat those two impostors just the same;   
If you can bear to hear the truth you’ve spoken
    Twisted by knaves to make a trap for fools,
Or watch the things you gave your life to, broken,
    And stoop and build ’em up with worn-out tools:

If you can make one heap of all your winnings
    And risk it on one turn of pitch-and-toss,
And lose, and start again at your beginnings
    And never breathe a word about your loss;
If you can force your heart and nerve and sinew
    To serve your turn long after they are gone,   
And so hold on when there is nothing in you
    Except the Will which says to them: ‘Hold on!’

If you can talk with crowds and keep your virtue,   
    Or walk with Kings—nor lose the common touch,
If neither foes nor loving friends can hurt you,
    If all men count with you, but none too much;
If you can fill the unforgiving minute
    With sixty seconds’ worth of distance run,   
Yours is the Earth and everything that’s in it,   
    And—which is more—you’ll be a Man, my son!

Out of the night that covers me,
      Black as the pit from pole to pole,
I thank whatever gods may be
      For my unconquerable soul.

In the fell clutch of circumstance
      I have not winced nor cried aloud.
Under the bludgeonings of chance
      My head is bloody, but unbowed.

Beyond this place of wrath and tears
      Looms but the Horror of the shade,
And yet the menace of the years
      Finds and shall find me unafraid.

It matters not how strait the gate,
      How charged with punishments the scroll,
I am the master of my fate,
      I am the captain of my soul.


Now we will count to twelve and we will all keep still.
For once on the face of the Earth let’s not speak in any language, let’s stop for one second,
and not move our arms so much.
It would be an exotic moment without rush, without engines, we would all be together
in a sudden strangeness.
Fishermen in the cold sea would not harm whales
and the man gathering salt would look at his hurt hands.
 not to be republished  Those who prepare green wars, wars with gas, wars with fire, victory with no survivors, would put on clean clothes and walk about with their brothers
in the shade, doing nothing.
What I want should not be confused
with total inactivity.
Life is what it is about;
I want no truck with death.
If we were not so single-minded about keeping our lives moving, and for once could do nothing, perhaps a huge silence
might interrupt this sadness
of never understanding ourselves and of threatening ourselves with death.
Perhaps the Earth can teach us as when everything seems dead and later proves to be alive.
Now I’ll count up to twelve
and you keep quiet and I will go.

A thing of beauty is a joy for ever: 
Its loveliness increases; it will never 
Pass into nothingness; but still will keep 
A bower quiet for us, and a sleep 
Full of sweet dreams, and health, and quiet breathing. 
Therefore, on every morrow, are we wreathing 
A flowery band to bind us to the earth, 
Spite of despondence, of the inhuman dearth 
Of noble natures, of the gloomy days, 
Of all the unhealthy and o'er-darkened ways 
Made for our searching: yes, in spite of all, 
Some shape of beauty moves away the pall 
From our dark spirits. Such the sun, the moon, 
Trees old and young, sprouting a shady boon 
For simple sheep; and such are daffodils 
With the green world they live in; and clear rills 
That for themselves a cooling covert make 
'Gainst the hot season; the mid forest brake, 
Rich with a sprinkling of fair musk-rose blooms: 
And such too is the grandeur of the dooms 
We have imagined for the mighty dead; 
All lovely tales that we have heard or read: 
An endless fountain of immortal drink, 
Pouring unto us from the heaven's brink. 

       Nor do we merely feel these essences 
For one short hour; no, even as the trees 
That whisper round a temple become soon 
Dear as the temple's self, so does the moon, 
The passion poesy, glories infinite, 
Haunt us till they become a cheering light 
Unto our souls, and bound to us so fast, 
That, whether there be shine, or gloom o'ercast; 
They always must be with us, or we die. 

       Therefore, 'tis with full happiness that I 
Will trace the story of Endymion. 
The very music of the name has gone 
Into my being, and each pleasant scene 
Is growing fresh before me as the green 
Of our own valleys: so I will begin 
Now while I cannot hear the city's din; 
Now while the early budders are just new, 
And run in mazes of the youngest hue 
About old forests; while the willow trails 
Its delicate amber; and the dairy pails 
Bring home increase of milk. And, as the year 
Grows lush in juicy stalks, I'll smoothly steer 
My little boat, for many quiet hours, 
With streams that deepen freshly into bowers. 
Many and many a verse I hope to write, 
Before the daisies, vermeil rimm'd and white, 
Hide in deep herbage; and ere yet the bees 
Hum about globes of clover and sweet peas, 
I must be near the middle of my story. 
O may no wintry season, bare and hoary, 
See it half finish'd: but let Autumn bold, 
With universal tinge of sober gold, 
Be all about me when I make an end. 
And now, at once adventuresome, I send 
My herald thought into a wilderness: 
There let its trumpet blow, and quickly dress 
My uncertain path with green, that I may speed 
Easily onward, thorough flowers and weed. 

The cardboard shows me how it was

When the two girl cousins went paddling

Each one holding one of my mother’s hands, 

And she the big girl - some twelve years or so. 

All three stood still to smile through their hair

At the uncle with the camera, A sweet face

My mother’s, that was before I was born

And the sea, which appears to have changed less

Washed their terribly transient feet. 

Some twenty- thirty- years later

She’d laugh at the snapshot. “See Betty

And Dolly," she’d say, “and look how they

Dressed us for the beach." The sea holiday

was her past, mine is her laughter. Both wry

With the laboured ease of loss

Now she’s has been dead nearly as many years

As that girl lived. And of this circumstance

There is nothing to say at all, 

Its silence silences. 

The world is too much with us; late and soon,
Getting and spending, we lay waste our powers;—
Little we see in Nature that is ours;
We have given our hearts away, a sordid boon!
This Sea that bares her bosom to the moon;
The winds that will be howling at all hours,
And are up-gathered now like sleeping flowers;
For this, for everything, we are out of tune;
It moves us not. Great God! I’d rather be
A Pagan suckled in a creed outworn;
So might I, standing on this pleasant lea,
Have glimpses that would make me less forlorn;
Have sight of Proteus rising from the sea;
Or hear old Triton blow his wreathèd horn.

Five years have past; five summers, with the length 
Of five long winters! and again I hear 
These waters, rolling from their mountain-springs 
With a soft inland murmur.—Once again 
Do I behold these steep and lofty cliffs, 
That on a wild secluded scene impress 
Thoughts of more deep seclusion; and connect 
The landscape with the quiet of the sky. 
The day is come when I again repose 
Here, under this dark sycamore, and view 
These plots of cottage-ground, these orchard-tufts, 
Which at this season, with their unripe fruits, 
Are clad in one green hue, and lose themselves 
'Mid groves and copses. Once again I see 
These hedge-rows, hardly hedge-rows, little lines 
Of sportive wood run wild: these pastoral farms, 
Green to the very door; and wreaths of smoke 
Sent up, in silence, from among the trees! 
With some uncertain notice, as might seem 
Of vagrant dwellers in the houseless woods, 
Or of some Hermit's cave, where by his fire 
The Hermit sits alone. 

                                              These beauteous forms, 
Through a long absence, have not been to me 
As is a landscape to a blind man's eye: 
But oft, in lonely rooms, and 'mid the din 
Of towns and cities, I have owed to them, 
In hours of weariness, sensations sweet, 
Felt in the blood, and felt along the heart; 
And passing even into my purer mind 
With tranquil restoration:—feelings too 
Of unremembered pleasure: such, perhaps, 
As have no slight or trivial influence 
On that best portion of a good man's life, 
His little, nameless, unremembered, acts 
Of kindness and of love. Nor less, I trust, 
To them I may have owed another gift, 
Of aspect more sublime; that blessed mood, 
In which the burthen of the mystery, 
In which the heavy and the weary weight 
Of all this unintelligible world, 
Is lightened:—that serene and blessed mood, 
In which the affections gently lead us on,— 
Until, the breath of this corporeal frame 
And even the motion of our human blood 
Almost suspended, we are laid asleep 
In body, and become a living soul: 
While with an eye made quiet by the power 
Of harmony, and the deep power of joy, 
We see into the life of things. 

                                                        If this 
Be but a vain belief, yet, oh! how oft— 
In darkness and amid the many shapes 
Of joyless daylight; when the fretful stir 
Unprofitable, and the fever of the world, 
Have hung upon the beatings of my heart— 
How oft, in spirit, have I turned to thee, 
O sylvan Wye! thou wanderer thro' the woods, 
         How often has my spirit turned to thee! 

   And now, with gleams of half-extinguished thought, 
With many recognitions dim and faint, 
And somewhat of a sad perplexity, 
The picture of the mind revives again: 
While here I stand, not only with the sense 
Of present pleasure, but with pleasing thoughts 
That in this moment there is life and food 
For future years. And so I dare to hope, 
Though changed, no doubt, from what I was when first 
I came among these hills; when like a roe 
I bounded o'er the mountains, by the sides 
Of the deep rivers, and the lonely streams, 
Wherever nature led: more like a man 
Flying from something that he dreads, than one 
Who sought the thing he loved. For nature then 
(The coarser pleasures of my boyish days 
And their glad animal movements all gone by) 
To me was all in all.—I cannot paint 
What then I was. The sounding cataract 
Haunted me like a passion: the tall rock, 
The mountain, and the deep and gloomy wood, 
Their colours and their forms, were then to me 
An appetite; a feeling and a love, 
That had no need of a remoter charm, 
By thought supplied, not any interest 
Unborrowed from the eye.—That time is past, 
And all its aching joys are now no more, 
And all its dizzy raptures. Not for this 
Faint I, nor mourn nor murmur; other gifts 
Have followed; for such loss, I would believe, 
Abundant recompense. For I have learned 
To look on nature, not as in the hour 
Of thoughtless youth; but hearing oftentimes 
The still sad music of humanity, 
Nor harsh nor grating, though of ample power 
To chasten and subdue.—And I have felt 
A presence that disturbs me with the joy 
Of elevated thoughts; a sense sublime 
Of something far more deeply interfused, 
Whose dwelling is the light of setting suns, 
And the round ocean and the living air, 
And the blue sky, and in the mind of man: 
A motion and a spirit, that impels 
All thinking things, all objects of all thought, 
And rolls through all things. Therefore am I still 
A lover of the meadows and the woods 
And mountains; and of all that we behold 
From this green earth; of all the mighty world 
Of eye, and ear,—both what they half create, 
And what perceive; well pleased to recognise 
In nature and the language of the sense 
The anchor of my purest thoughts, the nurse, 
The guide, the guardian of my heart, and soul 
Of all my moral being. 

                                            Nor perchance, 
If I were not thus taught, should I the more 
Suffer my genial spirits to decay: 
For thou art with me here upon the banks 
Of this fair river; thou my dearest Friend, 
My dear, dear Friend; and in thy voice I catch 
The language of my former heart, and read 
My former pleasures in the shooting lights 
Of thy wild eyes. Oh! yet a little while 
May I behold in thee what I was once, 
My dear, dear Sister! and this prayer I make, 
Knowing that Nature never did betray 
The heart that loved her; 'tis her privilege, 
Through all the years of this our life, to lead 
From joy to joy: for she can so inform 
The mind that is within us, so impress 
With quietness and beauty, and so feed 
With lofty thoughts, that neither evil tongues, 
Rash judgments, nor the sneers of selfish men, 
Nor greetings where no kindness is, nor all 
The dreary intercourse of daily life, 
Shall e'er prevail against us, or disturb 
Our cheerful faith, that all which we behold 
Is full of blessings. Therefore let the moon 
Shine on thee in thy solitary walk; 
And let the misty mountain-winds be free 
To blow against thee: and, in after years, 
When these wild ecstasies shall be matured 
Into a sober pleasure; when thy mind 
Shall be a mansion for all lovely forms, 
Thy memory be as a dwelling-place 
For all sweet sounds and harmonies; oh! then, 
If solitude, or fear, or pain, or grief, 
Should be thy portion, with what healing thoughts 
Of tender joy wilt thou remember me, 
And these my exhortations! Nor, perchance— 
If I should be where I no more can hear 
Thy voice, nor catch from thy wild eyes these gleams 
Of past existence—wilt thou then forget 
That on the banks of this delightful stream 
We stood together; and that I, so long 
A worshipper of Nature, hither came 
Unwearied in that service: rather say 
With warmer love—oh! with far deeper zeal 
Of holier love. Nor wilt thou then forget, 
That after many wanderings, many years 
Of absence, these steep woods and lofty cliffs, 
And this green pastoral landscape, were to me 
More dear, both for themselves and for thy sake! 
